One example, I see somebody with whom I have cross relation, as soon as I see him, my mind starts working, anger, anger, a mental, unwholesome mental action has started. It becomes intense, intense, intense, manifest itself as a vocal action. I shout, I abuse, unwholesome vocal action is the result. It becomes more intense, more intense, more intense, manifest as a unwholesome physical action. I slap him. If I have a gun, I kill him, shoot him, kill him, unwholesome physical action. What is this unwholesome vocal action or physical action? Just a projection of the mental action, just a yardstick to measure the intensity of my unwholesome vocal action, mental action. As unwholesome, so also wholesome. I see somebody in a very wretched, miserable condition. My start, mind starts working, compassion, compassion. This mental action, wholesome mental action manifest itself as a vocal action when it becomes intense. I speak a few words, kind words, loving words, compassionate words, wholesome vocal action. It becomes more intense, more intense, manifest as a physical action. I help this person at physical level, give him something, a wholesome physical action. Wholesome or unwholesome, all vocal and physical actions are projections of the mental action. This is the realization of an enlightened person. This is the enlightenment of an enlightened person. Mind matters most. Everything starts in the mind. Everything starts in the mind. Mind precedes everything. He is putting words to his own experience when he says, Manopubangamadhammanosethammanomaya Manopubangamadhammanosethammanomaya Mind precedes everything else, Manosetha. That is why mind is most important. Mind matters most, Manomaya. Whatever you experience throughout the life is nothing but the product of your own mind, Manomaya. Manasa chepad duthene bhasativa karutiva With the base of an unwholesome mind, an impure mind, a defiled mind, you perform any action, physical or vocal, then, Tatonam dukhamanvetichakamvavato padam then misery will keep on following you, following you. Like the wheel, the wheel of the cart follows the horse who is yoked to that particular cart. Wherever this cart goes, wherever this horse goes, the wheel keeps on following, keeps on following because the base was wrong. So the misery keeps on following you, keeps on following you. Similarly, Manasa chepasannene bhasativa karutiva With the base of a pure mind, wholesome mind. If you perform any action, vocal or physical, then, Tatonam sukhamanvetichayavayanapayane then all the happiness keeps on following you, following you like your own shadow. Wherever you go, your shadow is there. Wherever you go, your shadow is there. This is the law of nature. The base of the mind is most important. This is the base of the mind which makes you act at the mental level first and then it goes to the vocal level and the physical level. The result that you get, the fruit that you get is the fruit of your mental action, the volition of your mind. Not the vocal action, not the physical action. An example, I see somebody with whom I have got cross relation, generate anger and then I shout, I abuse, you dog, you pig, etcetera. I don't know why you abuse in your country, but in Hindi they say you dog, you pig, you donkey, abused. One incident over. Another incident, I see my grandchild having come, lying in the mud somewhere and soiled all the clothes. I say, you dog, you pig, you donkey. Same words. I've used the same words at the vocal level. The same action is there. But from the mind, the mental volition is poles apart. When I was using these words for my enemy, it was full of ill will. When I'm using the same words for my grandchild, it is full of goodwill. Nature takes care of the volition of the mind, not the vocal action. The result that you will get, the fruit that you will get, will be according to the volition of the mind, not according to the vocal action. So also not according to the physical action. Another example, a very rich person with lot of money, jewellery, etcetera, is travelling in a jungle alone. A dacoit, a robber comes from the other direction. He finds out this man has got lot of money. He wants that. This person doesn't want to depart from his money. He says no. And out of anger, he takes out his knife and plunges in the stomach of this traveller as a result of which he dies. One incident. Another incident, somebody has developed a kind of ulcer, very painful. Different treatments were given, could not be cured. Then a surgeon says that, well, if I cut open, take this ulcer out, perhaps you will be relieved. All right, go ahead. He is made to lie down on the operation table in the operation theatre. The surgeon takes out the knife, plunges in the stomach, and it so happens, at that time, this patient dies. The doctor and the dacoit did the same thing at the physical level. They took out their respective knives, plunged in the stomach of somebody as a result of which that somebody died. Now will the nature, or say the God Almighty, is going to give the same result to both of them? Oh no, the mental volition. The mental volition of that dacoit was full of ill will. And the mental volition of this doctor, full of goodwill. The nature takes care of the motivation of the mind, the volition of the mind. And the fruit comes exactly according to the head. What is the base of the mind? The base of the mind is more important, the volition of the mind is more important than any action at the physical or vocal level. We have to be careful about the mind and the volition of the mind. For that one must understand what the mind is and how it works. And Vipassana will help you. Understand. The whole technique is to divide, dissect, disintegrate, dissolve the entire physical structure. You won't have to do anything, you just observe, observe, observe. Nature will start dividing, dissecting, disintegrating, dividing, dissecting, disintegrating, dissolving. Initially you get very gross, solidified, intensified experiences of the body. And then they start getting dissolved, dissolved, dissolved. You reach the stage where there is nothing but a very free flow of subtle vibrations, free flow of energy, very subtle, very subtle. Similarly, the mind is divided, dissected, disintegrated. One who becomes fully enlightened, examines the entire mental and the physical structure. The physical structure dividing, dividing, he reaches the stage, the tiniest subatomic particle, which he calls atta kalapa, eight things joined together, they cannot be further dissected. Similarly, mind dividing, dividing, dividing, the mental contents, dividing, dissecting, one reaches the stage where one finds there are 121 types of mind. 52 types of mental contents, which you call mental concomitants. Every mind arises with one concomitant or the other. At this stage, when you just started the kindergarten of Vipassana, no use even to remember those 52 and 121 minds and mental contents. Now the four major portions of the mind, if you understand them, and if you understand how they function, you will be experiencing them, that will be very helpful. The four major segments of the mind, first segment of the mind, in the language of those days, in Buddha's words, it was called vijnana. The nearest English translation of that can be consciousness. First part of the mind, consciousness, its job is to cognize. All the six sense doors we have, the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, the body, body skin and the mind, all the six sense doors have six separate vijnanas, six separate consciousness, eye consciousness, ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness, mind consciousness, six vijnanas. Something comes in contact at any sense door. A sound comes in contact at the ear sense door and the ear consciousness will arise. A shape, a form, a color, a light comes in contact with eye sense door and eye consciousness will arise. Smell comes in contact with the nose and nose consciousness will arise. Taste comes in contact with the tongue and tongue consciousness will arise. Something tangible comes in contact with the body and body consciousness will arise. A thought, emotion comes in contact with the mind and mind consciousness will arise. These six consciousness, their job is to cognize that something has happened. Ears consciousness, a sound has come in contact with the ears, the ear consciousness arises, look something has happened. And immediately another part of the mind will raise its head. In the language of those days it was called sanya. The nearest English translation can be perception. Its job is to recognize. A sound has come in contact with the ear. The first part will say something has happened at the ear sense door. That's all. And the second part, will try to recognize what has happened. Words, what words? Words of abuse or words of praise. It recognizes with all the experience of the past, all the conditioning of the past and all the memory of the past, it recognizes. And not only recognizes, it gives an evaluation. Words of abuse, oh very bad. Words of praise, ah wonderful. And as soon as this second part has done its job, third part starts working. In the language of those days it was called vedana, sensations, experiencing sensations on the body. As soon as evaluation is given, that these are words of praise and wonderful, you will notice there is a flow of very subtle and pleasant vibrations. Throughout the body there is a flow of pleasant vibration. Because the evaluation is that these are very good words. Words of abuse and evaluation given, very bad. And you find there is a flow of very unpleasant sensation on the body. The third part of the mind experiences sensations on the body, pleasant, unpleasant. And then immediately the fourth part of the mind is just said, in the language of those days it was called sankhara. Its job is to react. This word remember, I will be using it again and again throughout this coming six days, sankhara. It is actually the motivation of the mind, the reaction of the mind. And it is something which is a heap of action. The first cognizing is not a action, it will not give any fruit. Recognizing is not a action, it won't give any fruit. Feeling is not a action, it won't give any fruit. But this sankhara, the reaction, this is an action, this gives fruit. Because you repeatedly, you keep on repeating it, repeating it. Words of praise, pleasant sensation and this part of the mind keeps repeating, I want it, I want more, I want more. Craving, craving, craving, clinging. Continuously craving, clinging, craving, clinging. Words of abuse, unpleasant sensation. This part of the mind reacting, aversion, hate it, I don't like it, I don't like it, I want to get rid of it. Aversion, aversion, aversion, aversion. Continuous, continuous aversion. This sankhara. This is the volition of the mind which results into mental action and this gives fruit. How deep is your sankhara? How strong is the seed? What is the quality of this sankhara? That, that kind of fruit will come. There are three types of sankharas. One keeps on generating three types of sankharas. Wholesome, unwholesome, leave aside. Three kinds of sankharas. One is like a line drawn on the water. As you draw, so it gets eliminated. As you draw, so it gets eliminated. Second is like a line drawn on the beach, sand. Morning you have drawn a line, by evening it got eliminated. And the third is like a line drawn on rock. Deep line with chisel and hammer. Very deep. It takes years together to get it eradicated. But very deep line. This third one is very dangerous. And this is what we keep on doing. When you keep on repeating, repeating anger. And you keep on repeating anger, anger, anger, anger. Hatred, hatred, hatred. Passion, passion, passion. Fear, fear, fear. Worry, worry, worry. Anxiety, depression. All these defilements. You keep on repeating, repeating, repeating. It goes deeper, deeper, deeper. And it gives deeper results. Much more misery it will give. This you will understand more and more as you practice this technique. The functioning of the mind. These four sectors of the mind. The relation with the body. The interaction of the two. How one keeps on influencing the other. How one gets influenced by the other. How the sankhara that I am generating is becoming deeper, deeper, deeper. How if I am more alert, attentive, aware. They don't go so deep. And I am coming out of my misery. That becomes clearer and clearer. Whole day you have been generating sankhara after sankhara. Every time something is happening deep inside. Some sensation and you react. Some sensation and you react. Every moment you are doing that. Night you go to bed. And you try to remember how many sankharas I generated the whole day. You can't remember. Countless sankharas. You will remember just one or two. Which had very deep impression on you. Oh, today I did like this which I should not have done. I reacted like this which I should not have reacted. Just one or two. At the end of the month you try to remember these deep sankharas. Each day one or two. At the end of the month not 30 or 60. At the end of the month again one or two which were very deep for the whole month. At the end of the year also. Just one or two which were very deep for the whole year. Similarly at the end of the life. Whether you like it or not. Some sankhara which is very deep will come on the surface. At the time of death, that moment, the mind moment is carrying this type of sankhara. The next mind is a child of this mind. The first mind of the next life is a child of the last mind of this life. Like father, like son it will carry all the qualities good or bad with it. If this last mind is full of pebbles and stones, the next mind, that means the first mind of the next life is full of pebbles and stones, misery, nothing but misery. And if this last mind of this life is full of butter, light, then the next mind is automatically full of butter. It is a product of the last mind. Last mind is very important. That means one has to learn how to die. Die smilingly. And this is what Vipassana teaches you. Anyone who gets established in Vipassana, even a little bit established, we have noticed, that of course everyone dies, even a Vipassana meditator has to die. Vipassana meditators when they die, there is not a single case, only one case, little doubtful, otherwise hundreds who have died. Not a single person has died unconscious. Not a single person has died crying or with fear. With fear, everybody dies consciously and smilingly. Oh, death is coming, coming, coming, with this sensation, coming, coming, has come. So, you observe. Why cry? There is a promotion. There is no demotion. People cry because they see demotion. There is demotion, so they cry. When there is a promotion, no crying. You are going in a better place, you are being promoted. Vipassana meditator never cries in death. Learns the art of dying. And art of dying will be only perfect when you learn art of living. If you keep on crying whole life, and then you want at the time of death, I will smile, impossible. So you have to learn how to smile whole life. Art of living will turn into art of dying. Art of living, this is what you are learning now. Everything that happens outside creates a sensation inside. And this first part will know something is happening. The second part will start giving evaluation. And this evaluation will turn this sensation pleasant or unpleasant. If you train your mind not to get affected by these sensations, pleasant or unpleasant, not to react to the sensations, pleasant or unpleasant, then you are changing the habit pattern of your mind at the deepest level. Even if you react, the sankhara will not be that deep, because you won't be repeating again and again. You will come to senses. Of course, now just a beginning. Now just a beginning, in one hour, most of the time you will be repeating this sankhara again and again. Oh, so much of pain. What sort of meditation is this? So much pain. I don't like pain. You are repeating. Old habit is there. But you get few moments, when you say, all right, let me see how long it lasts. I don't react. I don't generate sankhara of aversion. And I observe. Few moments, wonderful moments. When you are just observing, your head is above the water. And then you again start reacting. Your head has gone below the water. And you don't know where you are flowing. And after some time, again, the head comes above the water. Those few moments when your head is above the water are wonderful moments. Those few moments will turn into few seconds. And these few seconds will turn into few minutes. And like this, slowly, you turn the table. You change the habit pattern of your mind. You come out of this misery. Every time you react, and you keep on reacting for longer periods, you find you are just sunk in misery. Sunk in misery. Come out of it. Come out of it. A very wonderful technique is there. And you come here to practice, to work. The remaining six days are very wonderful. Try to get as much established as you can in the technique. And make use of it for the whole life. Make use of it. The remaining six days are very valuable for you. Every moment is very valuable. The wonderful technique is there. The path is there. The law is there. The nature is there. The reality is there. Keep on observing it, observing it, observing it. Make best use of the time. Make best use of the opportunity. Make best use of whatever facility you have here. Make best use of the wonderful Dhamma, the wonderful technique. To come out of all the miseries. To come out of all the ignorance of generating Sankharas after Sankharas, Sankharas after Sankharas. Come out of this bondage. Get liberated. And enjoy real peace, real harmony, real happiness, real happiness. VVETU SÖV MANGALAN VVETU SÖV MANGALAN VVETU SÖV MANGALAN VVETU SÖV MANGALAN VVETU SÖV MANGALAN VVETU SÖV MANGALAN VVETU SÖV MANGALAN VVETU SÖV MANGALAN VVETU SÖV MANGALAN VVETU