something by the course, cannot resist, feels like telling others, oh, so wonderful, the family members, the friends, please go and see, it is so good, you also try, it is so good, it has done me so good, it will do you good also, and a number of people started participating in the course, one of my friend, a very rich person, a co-industrialist businessman, and a very rich person, and a industrialist, and a businessman, good testimonial to say a very miserable person, very miserable person, not that to do trade or industry is wrong, but the way in which it is done, a rat race, just to earn money, money, money, such madness is there, very miserable, because I had passed through the same game, so I knew the misery, and I was coming out of that misery, so I told him, you also try, he won't accept, so you went because of your migraine, I have no migraine, why should I go, although he had bigger migraines, which I knew, and yet he won't go, it took me one and a half years to convince him, just try, give a try, give a try, and he came, two days, three days, somehow he worked, fourth day Vipassana was given, and the fifth day the teacher goes round, there every ideal meditation center must have individual cells for each individual meditators, so there are cells, and the teacher will go there to give guidance to the students, and when there are Indians who can't understand Burmese properly, he will take me to translate, so we went to the cell of this meditator, my friend, knocked at the door, he opened, the first question we asked, what sensation, he said, no sensation, no sensation, and we see he has taken off his shirt, his undershirt, his dhoti is tucked up, perspiring, he, you got so much perspiration, yes, I have got so much perspiration, this small little cell, so much heat in it, you got heat, then you observe the heat, observe the perspiration, he looks at me, looks at my teacher, what we are talking, to observe heat, I have come here to observe heat, to observe perspiration, what we are talking, as if we are joking, and we say, well, look, this is the technique, you have to do that, observe, you have been reacting to them, now you observe, he won't listen, I have come here, if you make me witness the soul, then there is some meaning, witness the God, then there is some meaning, even witness Buddha, he is incarnation of God Almighty, there is some meaning, no purpose otherwise, what purpose there is to observe this heat, and every day we try to explain, and every day when we question any sensation, nothing special, he is looking for something special, nothing special, I felt so sorry, with such difficulty he came, and all the ten days he kept on looking for something special, something special, and nothing special came, the nature was manifesting itself, the nature of the body was manifesting itself, the truth was manifesting itself, the dhamma was manifesting itself, and he was kicking it, no, I don't want it, I want something special, something special, after one year he saw so many people going there, and everyone goes there, comes out smiling, this benefit, that benefit, he felt very sorry, he missed something, he understood, so he pressed once more, please give me one more chance, the teacher will not take, but please recommend one more chance, now if you say to observe heat, I will observe heat only, nothing else, perspiration I will observe perspiration only, nothing else, and yet he came, and he worked properly, and he developed so much in Vipassana, so long as you are looking for something special, you are not doing Vipassana, Vipassana is Yatha, Bhuta, whatever has happened at this moment, the reality of this moment, as it is, as it is not as you would like it to be, if this is understood, you will keep on progressing, keep on progressing, there will be no difficulty, but if you keep on ignoring the reality which has manifested, and you look for something which is not there, then you are not doing Vipassana, so keep this point in mind, that whatever you feel at this body level, at the physical level, anything that you feel is a sensation, pleasant or unpleasant, intense or feeble, whatever it is, you just observe, just observe, you have done your job, and leave the rest to Dhamma, leave the rest to nature, thy will, you have done your job, and the results will start coming, you are moving from head to feet, from head to feet, you might reach a stage where you don't feel any sensation, on some part where there is no sensation, for you there is no sensation, for you it is a blind area, a blank area, actually there is no blind area, no blank area, sensation is there everywhere, but because your mind is very gross, and the prevailing sensation on that particular part is very subtle, so your mind is not capable of feeling it, so you say there is no sensation, alright, no sensation, this is the reality of this moment, no sensation, stay there, stay there calmly, quietly, attentively, and equanimously, very important equanimously, if you are not equanimous, then the technique will not help you, if there is no sensation, a blind area, you are staying there for a minute, and you start craving, oh I want a sensation, I want a sensation, you stayed one minute, no sensation, next round again you come, I want a sensation, I want a sensation, no sensation, or look five times no sensation, ten times no sensation, you are craving, craving, craving, and whenever you start craving, you lose the balance of your mind, and when the mind loses the balance, it becomes very gross, it can't feel the sensation which is subtle, therefore equanimous, even no craving, you may have aversion, look this blindness has not yet gone away, one round it has not gone away, five rounds it has not gone away, and you got aversion, aversion towards this blindness of the area, again you have lost the balance of the mind, remain equanimous, just accept the reality as it is, this is the moment when I am not experiencing any sensation in this area, I have done my job, no sensation, no sensation, let me see what happens, but see, if it is a covered part of the body, try to feel the touch of the cloth, this also the sensation, although very superficial, doesn't matter, touch of the cloth and move, if it is an open part of the body, uncovered part of the body, touch of the atmosphere, very superficial, yet touch of the atmosphere and move, and keep working like this, very patiently, very patiently, soon you will reach the stage where you will start feeling sensations everywhere. Two aspects of this technique, one is develop your capability, sensitivity of the mind to feel sensations everywhere of all different types, and the second, learn how to observe it objectively, objectively, try not to react, you are learning this technique to change the habit pattern of your mind at the deepest level, the deepest level of the mind, what you call the unconscious mind, actually it is not unconscious, every moment, day and night, it is feeling the sensation on the body, it is experiencing sensation on the body, every type of sensation, whatever comes up from moment to moment, it keeps on feeling, and it keeps on reacting to them, if the sensation is pleasant, it will react with craving, clinging, if the sensation is unpleasant, it will react with aversion, hatred, this habit pattern of this deep unconscious mind, all the time craving, hating, craving, hating, craving, hating, you have to turn this habit pattern, and for that you have to reach the stage where this habit pattern is prevailing, that means the deepest level of the mind where you feel sensations, and you don't crave, and you don't hate, you just observe, and understand, look it is changing, it is changing, it is changing, as you keep on working on it, keep on working on it, realities of nature will become clearer and clearer, the law of nature will start revealing itself, the law is law everywhere, outside, inside, the entire universe is governed by the same law, animate, inanimate, you can try to understand this law at the intellectual level, when you see things happening outside, but you cannot experience it, you can experience only when you feel things within the framework of the body, then you are experiencing it, and then it becomes very clear, there cannot be any confusion, there cannot be any doubt, and this is what he did. Although born in a royal family, a prince, it was peculiar, the prince was not born in a royal palace, he was born under a tree, open nature, open sky, at the age of about 5 or 6, it so happened, he was sitting under a tree, and he just started meditating, observing respiration, respiration, and went in very deep samadhi, deep absorption samadhi, under a tree, open nature, the first, first taste of meditation, the samadhi. At the age of 35, he went out, again under a tree, got fully enlightened, and then out of compassion, started distributing this wonderful technique to others, and started rotating the wheel of dhamma, the first teaching he gave, again under a tree, open nature, open sky, and at the ripened age of 80, he passed away, under a tree, open nature, open sky, all the important events of his life under a tree, open nature, open sky, he studied the nature so thoroughly, but studying the nature so thoroughly outside, cannot make one a Buddha, one cannot become an enlightened person. It was studying the nature inside, at the experiential level, which made him a Buddha, this is what he taught, all the time, you have to be aware of the reality within the framework of the body, and this is Vipassana, and by this, the entire law becomes so clear, so clear, at the experiential level. One thing that becomes very clear to a student of Vipassana is, change, change, every moment some change or the other is taking place, within the framework of the body, you are experiencing it, and outside also, the same law, changing, changing, constantly changing, constantly changing, as if everything is in a melting pot, everything is in a melting pot, nothing has come out as a final product now, no more change in it, animate or inanimate, everything in a melting pot, changing, changing, changing, all in a flux, all in a flow, that reality now comes with the experience within the framework of the body. Another reality, whatever is happening, a change is taking place, whatever is happening is not happening accidentally, everything that is happening has got some cause or the other, one cause or number of causes together at results into a effect, cause, effect, cause, effect, and the effect becomes a cause for something else, effect, cause, cause, effect, effect, cause, this is how the entire universe keeps on rotating, rolling, flowing, cause, effect, effect, cause, cause, effect, this becomes very clear at the experiential level. Another reality which will become very clear, as the cause is, so the effect will be, as the cause is, so the effect will be, as the seed is, so the fruit will be, outside in the vegetation world, we see the same thing, inside also one starts experiencing the same law, outside in the world. I plant two seeds, one seed of sugar cane, another seed of neem, a very bitter tree in tropical countries, a neem tree, same soil, same water, same air, same sun, they get same nutrition, they sprouted out and started growing, what happened, what happened to the sugar cane plant, every fiber of it, so sweet, so sweet and this neem tree, every fiber of it, so bitter, so bitter, why the nature is so kind to one and so cruel to the other or you can say, the god almighty, why he is so kind to one and so cruel to other, no, nobody is kind or cruel, this is just fixed law of nature, nature only gives nutrition and helps the seed to manifest its quality, the quality of the sugar cane seed is sweetness, sweetness, it manifests itself in every fiber, the quality of the neem seed is bitterness, bitterness is manifest in every fiber, law of nature, law of nature, a big neem tree has grown and I go there, pay respect three times, make 108 rounds, then offer flowers, incense, sweets etc. and then with moist eyes start praying, oh neem god, please give me sweet mangoes, please give me sweet mangoes, I want sweet mangoes, please give me, you keep on crying for the whole year, whole life, nothing happens, you get only bitter neem, you can't get sweet mangoes. If you really want sweet mangoes, then while planting the seed you must be very careful, you plant the seed of sweet mango, you will get nothing but sweet mango, our difficulty is that we keep on planting, while planting we are so careless, so unaware, so unmindful, keep on planting bitter seeds, bitter seeds, when the time of harvest comes, fruition comes, ah then I want sweet fruits only, sweet, not possible and expect that something will happen for me, in spite of my bitter seed being planted by me, I will get some sweet fruits, some invisible power will help me, the god almighty will help me, why god almighty will help you, why not others, because you praise him, you try to puff him and he becomes very happy because of that and he will help you and he won't help others, madness, the earlier one comes out of this madness and earlier one starts following the path of the law of nature, as I have planted the seeds, that type of fruits are bound to come, therefore I must be very careful while planting the seeds, while planting the seeds, the earlier one gets the path of liberation, otherwise one keeps on rolling, rolling, rolling in ignorance, just keeps on fooling oneself, deceiving oneself and keeps on rolling in misery, one cannot come out of the misery, law of nature is law of nature universal, applicable on everyone, as the seed is, so the fruit will be, as your action is, so the result will be, what kind of action, that kind of result is bound to be. One incident at the time of Buddha, one day a very young man came crying, crying, what happened, kept on crying, what happened? Sir, yesterday my father died. Well, he died, died, by crying he can't come back, no use crying, why you cry? Oh, sir, I have come to you with a special request. What special request? Please, sir, do something for my father, the dead father. What can I do for your dead father? You can do so much, sir, you are so powerful, such a great man. Look, these ordinary priests, they perform certain rites or rituals and as they perform the rites and rituals, one gets entry visa in the heaven and you, sir, if you perform some rites or rituals for my father, my father will get not only entry visa, he will get permanent stay, he will get a green card, green card for heaven. Please, sir, do something for my father, mad fellow. Buddha knew any kind of argument won't work, he is so emotional at this stage. He had his own way of explaining things, he said, all right, go, go to the market, buy two earthen pots, very happy. Buddha is now going to perform some rite and ritual for my father. Purchase two earthen pots, fill one with butter, we call it ghee, butter, fill the other with stones, pebbles, did it, close your mouth, seal properly, did it. Now, place them both in this pond nearby, placed it, with the weight they went down to the bottom, bring a big stick and a strong stick, strike at them, break them open, they were broken open. He was so happy, Buddha is performing a wonderful rite or ritual for my father. India is a vast land and a very ancient land, a land of diversities, land of extremes. You find people reaching the stage of full enlightenment like Buddha and you find people so ignorant, rolling in all these blind faiths and beliefs and dogmas, etc. Now, there is a belief, when the father or mother dies, the son will take the dead body and put on the funeral pyre and burn. When it is half burnt, he takes a big stick and strikes at the skull, the skull is broken and the belief, here the skull is broken and there the gateway of heaven is broken and one gets the entry. Now, because the father has already died and his body was already burnt yesterday, now as a symbol he is making me break these earthen pots and he did that. One that contained butter, that butter came up and started floating on the surface. One that contained pebbles, it remained at the bottom. Now, Buddha said, this much I have done. Now, call all your priests, let them come here and pray. Pray, O pebbles, come up, come up on the surface, come up on the surface. A butter, you go down, you go down, you go down. Let me see how it happens. What sir, you have started joking. Is it possible? This is not possible, sir. This is against the law of nature. The pebbles are heavier than water. They are bound to remain at the bottom. They can't float, sir. And the butter is lighter than water. It will keep on floating. It can't go down. Young man, you know so much about the law of nature and yet you do not want to understand the law of nature applicable to everyone. If your father kept on performing such actions, which were like pebbles and stones, he is bound to go down. Who can bring him up? If your father kept on performing actions which are light like butter, he is bound to go up. Who will pull down his legs? We don't try to understand our difficulty. We try to depend on somebody. Some invisible power will do something for me. Some invisible power will do something for me and we do nothing to change our own behavior pattern, our own actions and that is why one keeps on running in misery, misery after misery, misery after misery. The earlier one understands this law of nature and earlier one starts to live a life in line with this law of nature, the earlier one starts coming out of the ignorance, coming out of the misery and starts enjoying a good life. Once one agrees that I must be careful about my actions, the question comes what is the action? What is the action which gives fruit? There are three types of actions, physical action, vocal action and mental action. A very general understanding, common understanding is that physical action is very important, vocal action is less important and mental action has got no, no much importance, very minor. But when one starts observing the truth inside, as this person did and became enlightened, it becomes so clear that the mental action is most important, not the vocal, not the physical. They have their own effects. But the most important is the mental action. Everything starts in the mind first and then it becomes intense, intense, intense. This mental action turns into vocal action. It becomes more intense, more intense, it turns into physical action. The vocal action, the physical action is nothing but the projection of the mental action. It is a yardstick to measure the intensity of the mental action. It is the mental action which is most important.