a deep line drawn on the rock with chisel and hammer, that arises on the surface, gives a strong push and the consciousness arises somewhere else. So the flow continues because of the sankhara. Why the sankhara? And it was so clear, avijya pachaya sankhara, oh ignorance, ignorance. Everybody is generating sankhara because of ignorance. What ignorance? Not ignorant because one has not gone to any school or college. Not ignorant because one has not read scriptures. Not ignorant because one has not listened to dhamma talks, nothing doing. Ignorance at the experiential level. One does not know how the misery is arising deep inside, how there are sensations everywhere and how pleasant sensation one reacts with the sankhara of craving, how unpleasant sensation one keeps on reacting with the sankhara of aversion. This whole process continues deep inside and one at the surface level does not know anything what is happening. And this process of multiplication, generating misery, multiplying misery, generating misery, generating sankhara, multiplying sankhara, oh ignorance, ignorance. The whole chain became so clear, every link was so clear, avijya pachaya sankhara. Because of ignorance one generates sankhara, sankhara pachaya vinyanam. Because of sankhara there is vinyana, the consciousness, vinyana pachaya namarupam. Because of the consciousness a new life in mind and matter starts, namarup pachaya sarayatanam. With this mind and matter six sense doors are there, sarayatan pachaya phassa, because of that the contact is there and phassa pachaya vedana and because of the contact a sensation is there and vedana pachaya tanha and because of the sensation a craving is there, vedana pachaya tanha, tanha pachaya upadanam and this craving turns into clinging, into deep attachment, upadan pachaya bhava. And because of this deep attachment to the craving the process of bhava, bhava means flow of life, the flow of life keeps on flowing, flowing, it gets all the strength. Every time one comes to the end of the life this bhava, this sankhara which is so deep is called bhava sankhara, which is responsible to give a new life. So the process of becoming, becoming, becoming continues. It does not stop at the end of the life, it continues, bhava pachaya jati and because of this process of becoming, becoming, becoming, even after death a new life starts, jati, again a life, a birth comes and when the birth comes jati pachaya, jara, maranam, soka, paridev, dukkha, dumanasya payasa, sambhavanti, whenever a life starts it has to pass through all these miseries, miseries of old age, misery of disease, misery of death, misery of wanted things not happening, unwanted things happening, all kinds of physical and mental miseries one has to pass because the birth has started. It became so clear, the whole process became so clear, which can become clear with anybody who goes deeper, deeper, deeper, deeper, getting rid of the ignorance, understanding the truth, understanding the truth at the experiential level. Now it was clear how this process of misery, how it starts, how it keeps on multiplying, how to get rid of it, how to come out of it, how to break this chain, this link, this chain full of links, which link has to be broken, where the chain has to be broken. A life has started already with nama and rupa, that means mind and matter, the flu has started, what to do? Shall I commit suicide when the problem gets solved? Oh no, it does not get solved, one does not come out of misery. When one is committing suicide, what is the volition of the mind at that time, what is the condition of the mind, full of agony. The last mind of the life is full of agony, it will produce nothing but a new life full of agony. The next mind is full of agony because it is the product of the last mind of this life, suicide does not solve any problem, one cannot come out of misery by suicide. Then when the nama and rupa is there, mind and matter is there, the life is flowing, then these six sense doors, I better destroy them, the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, and then body, and then mind, again it will be suicide, how to destroy them? Then all the respective objects around the world, destroy them, impossible, how can I destroy all that? When these six doors are there and the respective objects are there, contact is bound to be there, you can't run away from that. And when the contact is there, the vedana, the feeling, the sensation is bound to be there, you can't get rid of it. And here the wisdom arose. This is the place where I can use an axe and cut the link here. The vedana is bound to come, so long as one is alive, things keep on getting in contact, this door, that door, at least the mind and matter keep on getting in contact every moment and there is a sensation, there is a sensation. With sensation, because of ignorance, because of avijja, with sensation, tanha arises, craving arises, aversion arises, now one has to turn the whole thing, sensation will be there, but with sensation, wisdom will arise, the reality, the characteristic, oh what is sensation? This is not eternal, this is not permanent, it has a reason to pass away, look, let me observe how long it lasts, and yes, it arises, it passes away, it arises, it passes away, however unpleasant a sensation may be, it is bound to pass away, however pleasant a sensation may be, it is bound to pass away, no purpose is served to react. What is the purpose of reacting to something which is by nature passing away? There is no meaning, there is no purpose is served, no sense in that. It becomes clearer and clearer, oh, coming to the stage where the sensations are being experienced and not reacting to the sensations will turn the whole process of the multiplication of misery and the process of liberation starts. He found out the sensation as an important point from where a sort of junction, from where two roads start. One road is, he said, dukkha samudaya gamini patipada, a road which is full of misery, you generate misery, you keep on generating misery, because with sensation you keep on reacting, every moment you are experiencing sensation, every moment you are reacting, so it is a process of multiplication of misery, multiplication of misery, and this very junction, this very point of your sensation on the body can take you to the road, which is the road of liberation, nirodha gamini, dukkha nirodha gamini patipada, all your misery will get eradicated, because now when you experience the sensation, you don't react, you just understand, anicca, anicca, oh impermanent, oh impermanent, this is what you started doing. First important thing is that you have to be aware of the sensations, and when you are aware of the sensations, not to react, every sensation should turn into panya, that means vidya, vedana, pacchaya, panya, every sensation must result in wisdom, not every sensation to result in tanha, craving and aversion, this is the path that you have chosen for liberation, going deeper to the level of sensation and not reacting, the whole chain is broken here and you find the entire chain gets broken, because avidya, there is no more ignorance now, avidya yatveva asesha viraga nirodha, when entire ignorance gets eradicated, sankhara nirodha, there is no more sankhara, you don't generate sankhara, sankhara nirodha, vinyana nirodha, then there is no more vinyana, the flow of consciousness will stop, vinyana nirodha, namarupa nirodha, then there is no more flow of mind and matter, namaroopa nirodha sarayatan nirodha, no more six sense towards, sarayatan nirodha pharsa nirodha, no more contact, pharsa nirodha vedana nirodha, no more sensation, and vedana nirodha tanha nirodha, no more craving, tanha nirodha upadan sirodhu, no more clinging, upadan nirodha bhav nirodha, no more the process of becoming, becoming, becoming, bhav nirodha jati nirodhu, no more new birth, and jati nirodha jara, maranam, so, paride, dukha, dumanasya payasa, nirujyanti, all the miseries that follow the birth, they automatically go away. Easy to understand, one may accept at the intellectual level, but doesn't help, one has to practice, go to the depth, where there are sensations, and you're not reacting, there are sensations, you're not reacting, and merely accepting it at the theoretical level does not help, even someone may not believe in past life or future life, doesn't matter, that's not very important, that you must first accept this past life and future life, then only your technique will help, one has to accept the present life, it is there, and every moment, you are generating misery for yourself, every moment you are generating a sankhara, and every sankhara is a misery for you, and you keep on repeating the sankhara, repeating the sankhara, making it so deep, deep line, deep inside, like a line drawn on the rock with chisel and hammer, so deep, more and more misery, deeper and deeper misery, at least you start coming out of it, you started coming out of that misery, your present misery, law of nature is such, when you stop generating a new sankhara with the experience of sensation on the body, the old ones will start coming up on the surface, all your accumulation of the past, which lie low, which are in the storehouse deep inside, they will start coming up, and as they come up, they will come up with some sensation or the other, and as they come up, again you are equanimous, you are not reacting, they lose their strength, they become feebler and feebler and pass away, another big chunk of past sankharas will come with this sensation or that sensation, again you are equanimous, like this the old ones will get eradicated, once you stop generating new sankharas, the old ones automatically get eradicated, little by little, as much as you are equanimous, they come on the surface, they get eradicated, they come on the surface, they get eradicated, this is what we say, Anicca Vata Sankhara, you will be listening this every now and then, this words of Buddha, Anicca Vata Sankhara, every sankhara is so Anicca, arising, passing, Upa, Dava, Dham, you know, arising and passing away is its nature, Upa, Dava, Dham, you know, but when it passes away, again it arises, it multiplies and again it arises, but if you are aware of your sensations and you don't react to them, then Upajjitva, Nirujhanti, it gets eradicated, it comes on the surface of course, gets eradicated, eradicated, and as much as is eradicated, Teh Sangh Bhup Samo Sukho, that much you start enjoying liberation, peace of liberation, happiness of liberation, because that much misery has gone away, this is the whole process, and this was the enlightenment of this person, he found out the real cause of misery and he found out how to get rid of this real cause at the deepest level. The first words, when he became fully enlightened, the first words of Buddha are so wonderful, every word of Buddha is very wonderful, but the first words, what were the first words of Buddha when he became enlightened? These stanzas also you will be listening every day, at least three times a day. Now, that was the night, full moon night of the month of Vishaka, when he was sitting under the tree, observing the truth inside, as one goes deeper and deeper, purifies the mind, purifies the mind, certain faculties of the mind increase. One faculty is the memory of the past. By the time he was, he had passed the midnight, this faculty arose, he started seeing his past, not only this life, but the past life, and he started seeing the past life. By the time he was, he had passed the midnight, this faculty arose, he started seeing his past, not only this life, but the past life, second past life, tenth past life, and like that kept on looking at his past, past, past, countless lives, and then he says, In this flow of the world, I have taken so many times birth, birth after birth, birth after birth, so many lives, countless, anek means countless, not just one, countless. And every time I have taken birth, I kept on running, running, incessantly without stopping. Everyone who takes birth keeps on running, keeps on running towards the death. As soon as you take birth, you start running, running, running towards the death. You can't wait even for a second, let me wait now, I don't go towards death. You can't wait. You have to keep on running, running, running incessantly towards the death, without attaining anything, without achieving anything. And then in some of the lives he found, some wise people told him that all this circle of birth and death and misery, you can come out of this, provided you can witness the creator, the great creator. So, many lives, he kept on searching this creator, who is the creator? Gahkarakangave Santu, the creator of this house. What house? Every time one dies, another house is ready. Every time one dies, another house is ready. Gahkarakang, who creates this house? Gahkarakangave Santu, in search of the creator of the house, Dukha jati puna puna. Again and again I kept on getting birth, full of misery, full of misery, in this plane or that plane, everywhere misery is there, even at the highest planes, celestial planes or brahminic planes, the misery of the old age and the misery of death is there. You are not totally out of misery. Gahkarakaditthosi, O builder of the house, now you are seen, I have seen you. Gahkarakaditthosi punagehangane kahasi, you can't build any house for me anymore. You can't build. How can somebody build a house for you? They must be building materials for that. Some timber or steel or cement or mortar. I have destroyed everything. Gahkarakaditthosi punagehangane kahasi, sabbate phasukabhagga gahkutangave sankhitang, I have destroyed all the building materials, you can't make a building for me. What are the building materials? Visankharagatam chittam, my mind is now free from all the sankharas. The sankharas which are responsible for a new birth are totally eradicated. Visankharagatam chittam tanahanam khaya madhyaga, and the craving is rooted out. There is no trace of craving left, so no more new sankharas. Old sankharas are already eradicated, and I can't generate new sankhara now. That is the stage of full liberation. And anyone and everyone can reach that stage, but one has to work. One has to work. Not just by craving and not just by praying, not that some miracle will happen and one will get liberated. One has to work. Each individual has to work. And work very seriously. These ten days you will get a technique how to work, how to go to the depth of the mind where you keep on generating sankhara day and night. Day and night there is a sankhara of craving, aversion, craving, aversion. How to change this habit pattern unless you start feeling sensations. There were many meditation techniques at the time of Buddha, before Buddha and after Buddha, but this was the contribution of Buddha, the discovery of Buddha that you cannot come out of your misery. The whole process of misery will remain unless you reach the stage where sankhara is being generated, where craving is being generated, and that is generated at the level of the sensations. You call it vipassana, you call it by any name. Any meditation which works with the body sensations and teaches us to remain equanimous with the body sensation is a meditation of liberation. Fortunately, one is very fortunate to come in contact with the meditation technique like that. And one is very fortunate, one gets inspiration to work on it, to walk on the path, of course it's a long path, however long it may be. The longest path, 10,000 miles long, starts with the first step. You started taking the first step. Those who have not taken even the first step on the right path, we cannot expect these persons to reach the final goal. Those who have taken the first step, there is every possibility of taking the second step, the third step, and step by step, step by step, one is bound to reach the final goal. Make use of these five days, the remaining five days. Learn how to walk on the path. And as much as you have covered the path, that much you have changed the habit pattern of your mind, that much impurities have come on the surface and you eradicated. Say you are carrying 100 tons of load on your head. If you take off only one ton, good, you go back with 99 only. You are relieved of one. You take off 10 tons, and like this 20 tons, 50 tons, 90 tons, who knows, take off as much as possible and you go lighter home. And the most important thing, you learn the technique how to take off the weight from your head, how to take off this misery and live a life, much better life, more peaceful, more harmonious, more happy. May all of you get established in this wonderful technique. Make best use of these remaining five days. Get established in Dhamma for your own good, for your own benefit, for your own liberation. Liberation from the bondages, the shackles, the chains of Sankharas. And enjoy real peace, real harmony, real happiness, real peace to you all, real harmony to you all, real happiness to you all. Devadat sa vimangalang Devadat sa vimangalang Devadat sa vimangalang Devadat sa vimangalang Devadat sa vimangalang Devadat sa vimangalang