The 5th day is over. You have now 5 more left to work. Half of the period is gone. Whatever is gone is gone. Whatever is left, a wise person always makes best use of whatever time is available these next 5 days, are very valuable for you. Quite a few students when they come to a course like this, initially they remain little confused. Because always one has some concept of meditation, meditation should be like this, like this, verbalization, visualization, imagination, contemplation, and look nothing is there. We are just asked to observe respiration, respiration, now this sensation, what we are doing? Some confusion is there. But one day after the other, one day after the other, partly by listening to these evening talks, dhamma talks, partly you are questioning the assistant teachers and their answers, but mostly because of your own practice. By practice you start realizing that there is something sensible in it. Not that all the confusion goes away, but at least by the time one reaches the 5th day, one feels like giving a fair trial to the technique, although everything looks quite new. We have never heard a meditation of this type, but let us give a fair trial and let us work. And we have found most of the students after 5 days, they start working very seriously. Work very seriously as the technique wants you to work, understanding it properly, what you are doing and why you are doing so. This is not a rite or a ritual or a religious ceremony, making round from the top of the head to the tips of the toes, and now from tonight you will work both ways, from the tips of the toes to the top of the head, both ways. Not a rite or a ritual, not that some Buddha above the clouds is there with the ledger portfolio of each individual student. How many times, how many rounds this person has done, Mr. A how many rounds, Miss B how many rounds, Mrs. C how many rounds, more the round the bigger the gate is open, nothing like that, nothing like that. There is nobody to open the gates for you. You have to open your own gates. You have to knock at the door and the door will get open for you, knock at the door of the kingdom of heaven within, the Brahmanic plane within, the Nibbanic truth within. Each individual has to work. The purpose of moving from head to feet and feet to head is to develop your faculty, faculty of awareness. Not just awareness of the reality at the surface level of the mind in which you remain involved at every sense door, a reality at the deeper level of the mind. When you start working with the sensations on the body, you start moving to the deeper levels of your mind, the so called unconscious mind which is actually never unconscious. It is always conscious of the sensations on the body and it keeps on reacting to the sensations. If it finds the sensation pleasant, then it reacts with clinging, craving. If it finds the sensation unpleasant, then aversion, hatred. This has become a habit pattern of the deepest level of the mind. It always remains a prisoner of it, a blind habit pattern. Whatever one understands at the surface level of the mind carry no meaning for this deepest layer of the mind. At the intellectual level one understands that I should not generate negativity. Every negativity goes against my own peace, my own harmony. It is no good. But all that understanding of the intellect does not help this deepest level of the mind. There is a big barrier, barrier between the two. Now this technique helps you to break that barrier. Whatever was being felt by the deepest level of the mind, pleasant sensation, unpleasant sensation is now felt by the entire mind. The whole mind is now awakened, awakened to the reality of the body sensations. And whatever was understood by the surface level of the mind, don't react with negativity, don't react with negativity. Now it is getting understood by the deeper level of the mind. The barrier is getting broken. It is for this purpose. There were many techniques prevailing in India 25 centuries back. And one who became Buddha, before becoming Buddha, he gave trial to nearly all of them. Many of them had their own good qualities, they gave benefit. But then he found that the roots of the impurities which are lying at the deepest level of the mind are not even touched. To take them out is far away. He called them Anushaya Kalesha. Kalesha means impurities, Kalesha means misery. Anushaya means sleeping misery, sleeping impurities. They are like sleeping volcanoes. The roots are there and they keep growing, keep growing. Anytime there will be a volcanic eruption and one gets overpowered, overwhelmed. One is not liberated. He realized that unless these roots are taken out totally, I don't call myself a liberated person. And he discovered this work with the body sensations. You started with respiration because respiration takes you progressively towards the awareness of the body sensation. Body sensation is so important. And as you proceed on the path, it will become clearer and clearer. Why these body sensations? You are training the deeper level of your mind not to react. And it never reacts to outside object. The deeper level of the mind has nothing to do with what you heard or what you have seen or what you have smelled or what you have tasted or what you have touched or what you have thought. Nothing doing. This deepest layer of the mind is constantly in touch with the body sensation. Of course with all these outside objects, when they come in contact with the sense doors, they create a sensation because this part of the mind when it gives evaluation, good, bad, that kind of sensation starts in the body. This mind, the deepest level of the mind, only feels body sensations, experiences body sensations and keeps on reacting day and night, day and night. How to change the behavior pattern of the deepest level of the mind? The whole exercise is for this purpose, to change the behavior pattern of the root level of the mind. There is misery of course. It cannot be denied. Misery is there. How to come out of misery? How to get liberated from all the miseries? Every life is full of misery. The world is full of misery. Every individual is miserable due to this reason or that reason, this apparent reason, that apparent reason. First important thing is to accept the truth that there is misery and misery is universal and not merely accept it at the intellectual level. Learn how to observe misery as misery. When you learn how to observe misery and misery, this universal truth of misery becomes a noble truth, first noble truth, noble truth in the sense that anyone who starts observing misery as misery objectively without reacting to it, sooner or later becomes a noble person, becomes a saintly person, becomes a liberated person, becomes an enlightened person. This is the first step. Accept the reality of the misery and start observing it. Observe it, don't react to it, just observe, just observe. This is what you started doing, misery if you are sitting for one hour, for half an hour you somehow manage and after that the real misery starts, severe pain, severe pain. Somehow you manage another 15 minutes and then the real torture starts, great torture. Someone comes to me and says, Goenkaji, the whole path is so good, the technique is so nice, I like it very much and your discourse is evening, wonderful, I like so much, but take out this one hour sitting, this is not good, just take it out. Everything else is so wonderful, I enjoy. I would also like to take it out but it doesn't work, you have to face, you have to face. And after 45 minutes when it becomes a real torture, every minute is like an hour, one hour has gone, one minute, one hour, one minute, one hour. It looks now, one hour is over and yet what a pity, I can't open my eyes and look at my watch, what a pity, certainly it is more than one hour, these assistant teachers they have forgotten to give the signal. And then suddenly you hear this chanting, Anicca Vata Sangha, how wonderful, so melodious. This chanting is so enchanting for you, so good. Still five minutes more to go, you can't open your hands, you can't open your eyes, you can't open your legs, but these five minutes, doesn't matter, you are happy now, I'll come out of this bondage, soon I will come out of this bondage. Oh, the misery of bondage and the happiness of liberation, you experience both. And the whole path is how to come out of the misery, the bondage of misery. Why all this? Many times in life you might be put in a corner where you have to face misery, you can't do anything. How to face it? Maybe physical, maybe mental. How to face it? You are learning now. And not only that, the equanimity that you are training your mind to remain equanimous, when everything is very pleasant, no pain, you say I am very equanimous, look I am not reacting, when a real pain starts and you are equanimous, maybe you are equanimous just for a few moments, rest of the time you are reacting, you are reacting. Those few moments are so strong, the equanimity is so strong, it starts cutting the root of your problem. Even though you get only few moments in that one hour, those few moments will turn into few seconds, they will turn into few minutes. And it happens, sometimes a student comes and tells me, I now started enjoying my pain. Yes, you start enjoying your pain, because you stopped reacting to the pain. The pain was physical pain and you multiplied it by making it a mental pain. If the mental part goes away and there is a physical pain and you just observe it, it has become half, then it will become quarter, it will become less, less, less, you start coming out of it. You have to learn how to observe your pain. Now the pain is so intense, it starts overpowering you. This had been the old habit pattern. You observe, as you reach this area, say severe pain here. Like a doctor comes and examines, doctor has no pain, he just examines. Here there is more pain, here less pain. You also examine like this, don't identify yourself with the pain, pain is pain, there is a pain, so what? I observe now, where is the center of the pain and how far is the influence of the pain? Oh, here it is more influence, more pain, then less pain, less pain, less pain, no more pain. More pain, more pain, less pain, less pain, no more pain, like you divide the area, dissect the area, next round, again you observe, you find along with pain there is something else, maybe pressure. Then you start dividing and dissecting the area, pressure wise, this is the center of the pressure, more pressure here, less pressure here, less pressure here, go on, and like this you divide and you may reach a stage where you find along with that there is heat, maybe along with that there is pulsation, and you will reach the stage where you will find in spite of the severe pain, there is an undercurrent of vibration which is throughout the body. And once you reach that stage, pain is no pain for you, it cannot overpower you. Don't expect this to happen tomorrow morning, you have to take time, you have to take time. But learn how to observe, most of the time you will be reacting because of your old habit pattern to react, but you will get few moments not to react, not to react. Those moments when you are not reacting, then this misery becomes a noble truth. The first noble truth, you are observing it objectively. As you learn observing the misery objectively, you are going deeper and deeper, at the experiential level you are going deeper and deeper to the second noble truth. The deep cause of the misery, at the surface level, everyone says I am miserable because of some external cause, so and so said something which I don't like, I became miserable, so and so did something I don't like, I became miserable, or something desirable did not happen in the life, I became miserable. These are all external causes, they are true, but very apparent, very surface level. And without understanding the real cause inside, one keeps on using all the strength, all the energy to rectify things outside, which is not possible. One cannot change others, one may keep on trying, even if one changes one, where is the guarantee that somebody else will not raise the head and do something against you. Keeps on happening, entire life wanted things may happen, unwanted things may happen, most of the time unwanted things happen, and you have to face all that, and go deeper and find out the real cause of your misery. This technique helps you to go to that depth and find out the real cause. Misery is not outside, outside are only sensual objects. Misery starts inside, and when misery starts inside, there must be some cause inside which makes one miserable. And that as you go deeper, deeper, deeper, you start understanding it, not just because of these discourses, not because you read some scriptures or books or you intellectualize the reality, nothing doing, with your own experience you start understanding, this is the deep rooted cause of my misery. And you start observing the deep rooted cause. The second noble truth, the cause of the misery, the real cause of the misery. When these two are realized, the work becomes easy. Like someone is sick and a doctor comes, the first important duty of the doctor is to find out what the disease is. The doctor who cannot find out what the disease is, cannot cure the patient. First important thing, what the disease is, and the second important thing, what is the deepest cause of this disease, not just symptoms of the surface. If the doctor keeps on dealing with the symptoms at the surface level, this doctor can never cure the disease. One has to go to the depth. The cause, the real cause of the disease, then it becomes easy. You find out a way to eradicate the cause. Once the cause is eradicated, the disease gets eradicated. So by this technique, you observe the real cause, and by this technique, you learn how to eradicate this real cause of misery. And when that is eradicated, the third noble truth, no more misery now. And then the whole process, how you have went to the depth and taken out the cause of your misery and the misery itself, the fourth noble truth. All these are not merely to be intellectualized. Of course, one must understand at the intellectual level, but all these has to be experienced at the actual level. Then only they start working. And this is what you started doing, going deeper, deeper, deeper. Now just it is beginning, there is pain, there is suffering, or it is pain because I am sitting for a long time, and then slowly you will understand there is pain because I have made this physical pain also as a mental pain. If I learn how just to observe it, the pain becomes less, and as you keep on observing, observing, you start coming out of it, again surface, you have to go much deeper, much deeper. What is happening? All around, what is happening? Why there is so much of misery all around? It becomes clearer and clearer, there is craving, craving. You want something to happen according to your wishes, it does not happen. You want to get rid of something which you don't like, it does not happen, craving. And the tremendous amount of attachment towards this habit of craving, craving, craving, it becomes clearer and clearer as you go deeper, deeper, deeper, deeper. The law which is working inside is also working outside. The law is the same, it does not make any difference. There is misery, and it becomes clearer, look, the life starts with misery. You are entering in the field of misery. From the time one has taken birth, one is entering in the field of misery, a desire, very soon this desire turns into craving, clinging, and then becomes very agitated. A child cries, I want milk, I want water, and cries, cries, because this is the only language the child knows. And from then onwards, as one grows, grows, grows, this unwanted things happen, that unwanted things happen, this unwanted things do not happen, that wanted thing do not happen, as one grows, grows, grows, some disease, some disease or the other. If entry of the life is dukkha, in the language of those days it was said, jati pidukkha, the birth, the life, beginning of the life is entering the field of dukkha. Byadhi pidukkha, you come in contact with the disease. And when one is in contact with the disease, one is so miserable, this disease is so bad, I can bear any other disease.