The 8th day is over. You have only two more days left. Out of these two, only one day to work seriously. Even one day is good enough, if one really works, works seriously, works exactly as the technique wants you to work, you get so much benefits. Another important thing, keep on understanding the technique properly, so that even going back home, you will make use of this technique properly, you will practice properly, you will apply it in life properly. Otherwise, even if you work hard and work seriously, and you don't work properly, the benefits that you should get by this technique, you will be missing. Keep on understanding two important aspects of the technique. Both are equally important. Awareness and equanimity, they go together. Like two wings of a bird, they must be equal in size and equal in strength, otherwise the bird cannot fly. Like two wheels of a bullock cart or a horse cart, they must be equal in size and equal in strength, otherwise they won't work. So both are equally important, awareness as well as equanimity. If you are aware and you are not equanimous, the purpose is not served. You are equanimous but not aware of the sensations, the purpose is not served. If you are aware of realities outside, gross apparent reality, it is good, but this is not impersonal. Even the gross reality pertaining to your physical structure, your mental structure, physical structure, all the activities of the body, you are aware. Mental structure, some very solidified gross emotion comes in the mind and you are aware. It helps. But this is not the teaching of the enlightened one. He wanted you to work with the sensations of the body. There were teachers before Buddha. There were teachers contemporary to Buddha. There were teachers after Buddha also, and nearly all of them, unless someone was involved in any kind of immoral activity. Otherwise, every real saintly person will advise the same thing. The objects of your sense tool, don't react to these objects of the sense tool, the shape, the form, the colour, the light, the sound, the smell, the taste, the touch, the thought. They may be pleasant, they may be unpleasant. Don't react to them. Don't generate craving. Don't generate aversion. This was not something new, given by Gautama the Buddha. This was not his enlightenment. His enlightenment was to go to the depth of the problem. Everyone else was giving importance to Sarayatan, the six sense tools, and their objects, as if the craving and the aversion arises because of these objects of the six sense tools, which at the apparent level is true. But his discovery was Sarayatan, Pacchaya, Phassa, six sense tools come in contact with the respective six objects. And Phassa, Pacchaya, Vedana, with this contact starts a sensation on the body, pleasant or unpleasant. And Vedana, Pacchaya, Tanha, your craving, your aversion starts after you have started experiencing the sensation on the body. That link was missing. So people kept on practicing to come out of craving, to come out of aversion, but it was all at the surface level. The root was never touched. They didn't realize that they have to go to the level of the sensation on the body to take the root of the impurities out. This was the contribution of Gautama the Buddha to the mankind, to come out of their misery from the depth level. And if we missed this, then awareness is not complete awareness. Awareness of the sensations on the body and equanimity towards the sensations, pleasant or unpleasant. These are the two wheels of this cart. These are the two wings of this bird. Both must be equal in size and equal in strength for your progress. You started observing your respiration and observing respiration on a small area. When he wanted you to do this, there was a meaning behind it. If you work on a bigger area, then mind will not become that sharp. Then only the mind will feel very gross sensation here, very gross sensation here, some pain here, some pressure here, some heat here, but can never become sharp. The smaller the area, the smaller the area of awareness, sharper the mind becomes, more sensitive it becomes. And by the time you reach the third day, you started feeling sensations here. You further narrowed it down and you felt sensation on this area. It became easy for you to feel sensations everywhere. This is a very important station of the path of liberation. One has to reach this station where one feels sensations everywhere, gross or subtle, but everywhere. No part of the body should remain blind or blank, that means without any sensation. Sensation is there all the time, everywhere. But your mind should become sensitive enough to feel them. Very important station. But you can't do anything, you can't force that. It just happens naturally. Your job is to keep moving, stay where there is no sensation, stay for a minute, keep moving, stay for a minute. Very patiently, very patiently you find your mind is becoming subtler and subtler, is becoming more and more sensitive and it starts feeling everywhere. Second important station, again very important station, the dissolution of the entire structure, mind and matter. It turns into mere vibrations, vibration, he called it Bhangam. Bhangam is dissolution, total dissolution. Again you can't do anything. Let it happen naturally. You keep on observing, your mind becomes subtler and subtler, sharper and sharper, more and more sensitive. Automatically the law of nature is such the solidified, intensified, gross sensations, they start getting divided, dissected, disintegrated, divided, dissected, disintegrated, you start getting dissolved, dissolved, dissolved. That is Bhangam. You start getting a free flow of very subtle vibrations throughout the body. It's a very important station and yet he says it is a very dangerous experience. Dangerous in the sense that having come through all the unpleasant, gross, solidified sensation, suddenly you come to this very pleasant flow, very pleasant flow of vibration. According to the old habit pattern of the mind, you start developing craving and clinging for it. Oh, so wonderful. And he says this is the danger, very big danger. One can remain equanimous with the unpleasant ones, expecting that they will pass away and I will start experiencing subtler ones as others have started experiencing. But when the subtler one comes, one gets so much attached to it. This is a stage very frightening, he says. Very dangerous. One has to be very cautious not to develop any attachment to this pleasant sensation otherwise the progress will stop and not only progress will stop, regress will start because you will start generating now craving, craving, clinging, clinging and whenever you miss this pleasant sensation, flow of subtle vibration is not eternal. It comes, it goes away. Again some very deep-rooted Sankhara which otherwise would not have come on the surface because you started feeling a free flow of subtle vibration, because you reached the stage of total dissolution then only very deep-rooted Sankhara will come on the surface which might be of the type very gross nature gross sensations, unpleasant sensations and you feel so depressed, you start feeling I am regressing, I had such a wonderful sensation and now look it's missing and now I am again with this unpleasant sensation. You have not understood Dhamma properly. You have started playing games of sensations. This is what one keeps on doing the whole life. A sound, pleasant or unpleasant, a sight, pleasant or unpleasant, a smell, pleasant or unpleasant, a taste, pleasant or unpleasant, a thought, pleasant or unpleasant. Now similarly, a sensation on the body, pleasant or unpleasant and you keep on reacting with craving, with aversion. What makes the difference? You have not understood Dhamma. In spite of repeated warnings we see some students of course few, but there are, who keep on taking courses after courses, courses after courses but they don't understand the technique. They don't understand Dhamma. They keep on relishing the pleasant sensations and they keep on having aversion towards the unpleasant ones. They keep on playing this game, game of sensation, game of sensation. This is not Vipassana. Not at all. You have to be very careful, understand the essence of the technique properly so that you work properly and you get the benefit of this technique properly. Unless you go to the root level, the sensation level and unless you have equanimity at the sensation level, whatever sensation, every sensation, gross or subtle, pleasant or unpleasant, has the same characteristic, characteristic of arising, passing, arising, passing. This is what you have to experience. When there is a solidified, intensified, gross sensation, then arising is clear. But after some time, sooner or later it passes away. It seems to stay for some time. It arises, seems to stay for some time and passes away. When this very intensified, solidified, gross sensation gets dissolved, turns into vibration, the characteristic remains the same. Arising, passing, arising, passing. Now with great rapidity, as it arises, so it passes. As it arises, so it passes. With great velocity, great frequency, characteristic remains the same. This characteristic must be very clear. Clear in your mind, look it is changing, changing, changing. And therefore, no craving, no aversion, no craving. This is how you change the habit pattern of your mind. Otherwise, deep inside, this process of multiplication, sankhara after sankhara, every moment you generate some sankhara or the other. Because sensations are there every moment, so long as one is alive, every moment there is some sensation or the other. And the deepest level of the mind is constantly in touch with these sensations. Whether you are asleep or you are awakened, 24 hours it is in contact with the body sensations. Like you are in deep sleep, when you say in deep sleep, it is only your conscious mind which has gone in deep sleep. The so-called unconscious is always conscious of the body sensations, always conscious. A mosquito has come and bitten, the unconscious, the so-called unconscious immediately feels unpleasant sensation, drives away the mosquito, kills the mosquito, still unpleasant sensation is there, will scratch and rub. And like this whole night, mosquitoes will come bite, come bite, and you won't know, your conscious mind won't know. That shows there is a big barrier between the conscious and the unconscious. Similarly when you are awakened, your unconscious mind will be busy with objects outside at a very gross level. But the unconscious, the so-called unconscious, it is the conscious which remains all the time busy with the outside object. The unconscious is constantly in contact with the body sensation and it keeps on reacting. There is a pressure somewhere, it reacts. There is a pain somewhere, it reacts. There is itching somewhere, it reacts. That reaction is continuous, that has become the habit pattern of your unconscious mind. Unless you change this habit pattern at the deepest level, you are not coming out of your misery, not coming out of your misery. You are just trying to amend the branches, the twigs, the leaves, the flowers, the fruits of the tree, but the root is decaying, is unhealthy. So long as the root is unhealthy, your tree can never become healthy. Your conscious mind can never become healthy, so long as the unconscious remains unhealthy. So Buddha found out that we have to work with the deepest unconscious level of the mind. This is what he started doing. If this point remains in your mind all the time, that I have to work with the deepest level of your mind, there are many other techniques, many other kinds of meditations, we are not here to condemn them, but so far as this technique is concerned, straight away it starts working with the depth of the mind. And if you miss that depth of the mind, our purpose is not served, because the process of multiplication continues, sankhara after sankhara. Every moment you generate a sankhara of craving or aversion, craving or aversion, and all the time a sankhara of ignorance, ignorance, you don't know what is happening. This is misery. Every sankhara is a misery. Multiplication is there. In the outside world also, in the world of vegetation, this process of multiplication, multiplication is there. So also deep inside, process of multiplication, multiplication is there. And there is a way to stop this multiplication and change this habit pattern. Like outside world, a small seed, seed of a banyan tree, in tropical countries we have a very huge tree, banyan tree, very tiny seed, size of a sesame. This small tiny seed contains this huge banyan tree. You plant it, a tree comes out which grows so huge, and it stays for centuries, very long life. One seed has started giving fruits. Every season, hundreds upon hundreds of fruits, and so many centuries, fruits after fruits, millions of fruits, one seed only. However long life this tree may have, a time will come when it will become old, will decay, will die, fall down, no more fruits. At the apparent level one may say that one seed has given millions of fruits, but after all the story ended. The story does not end. The multiplication continues. Understand how it continues. The seed that one planted, and this huge banyan tree, since it started giving, the law of nature is such, you don't have any fruit which does not contain the seed of the same quality, one or more. Every fruit will contain seed, and again this seed contains a huge banyan tree, and millions of fruits, millions of seeds, and every seed has got a huge banyan tree. Oh, endless process of multiplication, endless process of multiplication. But nature has also helped to understand that how this process can be stopped. It is true, every seed, every seed has one huge banyan tree, but this seed requires a fertile soil. It requires water. It requires fertilizer, manure. You throw it on a rocky land, it can't grow. Banyan tree cannot come out of it. But our difficulty is that these seeds of Sankharas, millions of millions of them are coming because of our seed that we planted once, so many are coming now, and we keep on giving good fertilizer to every seed that comes. Keep on giving very fertile soil to them. Oh, my Sankhara, you keep on growing. Oh, my misery, you keep on growing, you keep on growing, what ignorance. This is what one keeps on doing. Like one carries a tank full of gasoline, petroleum. One spark comes from outside, comes in contact with it, and a big explosion, huge explosion. Thousands upon thousands of new sparks. Without understanding that every spark that you generated now will bring hundreds and thousands of sparks in return, and then again every spark that comes, you will be giving all that gasoline again. Multiply, multiply, multiply. At the intellectual level, one understands this multiplication is so dangerous for me. I should not generate Sankharas. Every Sankhara is so harmful. Every Sankhara is multiplication of my misery, and yet it is merely an intellectual understanding. Unless you practice properly at the level of sensation, you can't come out of it. One knows very well, somebody is bringing fire towards me to burn me. The best thing is that I keep my water hose ready. When he comes, I open my water hose and extinguish the fire immediately. That one understands at the intellectual level. But at the actual level, somebody is bringing fire. I open my petrol pump. Burn, burn. I throw a bucket full of petrol over him. You burn, I burn, both of us burn. And later on you realize, that was so wrong. I should not have done that. When fire was brought towards me, I should have used water to extinguish it, not the petrol. And you go to your God Almighty, to this God, that God, Goddess, and pray, I made a mistake. Please excuse me, I made a mistake. Next time, the same mistake. Next time, the same mistake. You are not coming out of it. It doesn't help. Because you don't know what is happening deep inside. Deep inside, there is always this volcanic eruption, always this negativity, the reaction of negativity, and you can't come out of it unless you start observing the sensations on the body.