their head. You don't have long moustache or beards, yes, yes, long moustache or beard. You don't have the garland of beads around your rosary, yes, yes. You don't wear a skin of a deer, animal, around your waist, yes, yes. You don't smear ashes on your body, yes, yes. Then suddenly somebody says, all these questions have already been raised and whenever people raise these questions, he smiles, he says, I don't like it. You like it, you carry on. I'm not quarrelling with you. You carry on if you like it. I don't like it. How can you quarrel with somebody that he doesn't do? Let us find out something wrong in his practice and his teaching. All right, tear this away, new list. What is he preaching and what is he practicing? He preaches Srila, morality, and he practices morality. How can we argue on that? Morality is wonderful. If somebody living the life of morality, teaching others to live a life of morality, we can't quarrel. What else? He's teaching Samadhi. What is Samadhi? Mastery over the mind. Mastery over the mind. I could not get mastery over my mind. I've been trying so many years. If somebody has got a technique which makes you the master of your mind, it is wonderful. How can you fight? No. What else? He's teaching Panya. What Panya? A process by which all the impurities of the mind go away. Impurities go away? My impurities have not gone even a little. If impurities go away, wonderful. How can we fight on this point? No. What else? Nothing else. He doesn't talk anything else. He says, I teach and I practice only Srila, Samadhi, Panya, Srila, Samadhi, Panya. All other things, your beliefs, your dogmas, your philosophies are beyond me. I've got nothing to do with them. You carry on whatever you like. But these three are important. This is the essence of Dhamma. They go away because they can't argue. But somehow something should be done so that his preaching gets stopped. And one way, find out some scandal. If there is no scandal, create a scandal. And for a monk, what scandal? There can be only two types of scandals, money or woman. Money, we can't create a scandal of money because he has left all the householder's life as a prince, all the luxuries, and keeps nothing with him. But woman, yes, something can be done. Because men and women both come to learn Dhamma from him. So they trained one young beautiful girl. Every evening she will go to the ashram of Buddha, sleep under a tree with very heavy makeups and all. And next day with open hair, she will go out. Oh, I had a wonderful night with Samana Gautama. I had a wonderful night. People listen what happened, what she is talking. Two days, three days, seven days, then she stopped there. After about eight months, there was a big congregation. Large number of his disciples were there. He was teaching Dhamma. The ruler of the country, King Prasenjit was there. The commander-in-chief, the prime minister was there. Anath Pindak was there, Mother Vishakha, large number of people. And she comes. He placed a piece of wood, timber on the stomach, tied with some string and covered with her petticoat. And then came, shouting and abusing, Oh, shaven head, if you have nothing for your coming child, ask these rich people, your disciples, they should do something. And everybody, none plus what she is talking, talking about Buddha like this. Buddha smiles. Only love, only compassion. Oh my child, you know the truth of what you are saying. I know the truth of what you are saying. Only love, only compassion. It was very easy for him to ask the ruler, who was a great devotee, she is speaking a lie, take her head off. Her head would have been taken off, but then Buddha would not have been Buddha. Only compassion, only compassion. This vibration of compassion and she became so nervous, so nervous, the string became loose, the piece of wood came down. Dhamma works. He was successful by the calmness of his mind, by the harmony of his mind, by the peace of his mind, not by quarreling. You can never be successful. This he practiced in his life. So many situations came in his life and he kept his mind so calm, so tranquil, so pure, so harmonious, good for himself, good for everybody. One more incident. An old Brahmin, he was very angry that this fellow Buddha is teaching something which is totally against our religion. My own family members, my sons, my daughter-in-law, they all stop these rites, rituals, ceremonies and they sit in a corner and do this respiration, respiration, sensation, what they are doing. He will spoil all our religion. I must go and see that I open his skull. This is the only way to stop his teaching. And he goes there, very angry, comes nearer, abusing, abusing, abusing. Buddha says, old man, you seem to be very agitated. Come, sit, let us discuss your problem. He had made a decision. I won't start discussing with him because he is a very clever person. The moment I start discussing with him, my anger will go away. If my anger goes away, I can't open his skull. I must carry on with my anger. And he keeps coming nearer, nearer, abusing, abusing. Buddha says, old man, just answer one question. Don't you get some visitors at your house? Yes, yes, so many visitors come to my house. What are you going to do? Tell me, some visitors might be bringing some present for you. Yes, yes, some visitors do bring present. What are you going to do? A visitor brings a present to you and say you don't accept this present. What happens? What happens? The present remains with him who has brought the present. Same thing I want to tell you, old man, you came like a visitor to my place. You brought all these presents of yours, abuses. I have not accepted them. They are with you, your property, not my property. The old man was a very intelligent person. Only the small veil, curtain of ignorance which did not allow him to understand the truth. This curtain got broken and he started understanding. How is it? The whole life people bring presents to us, present of one abuse. In return we give ten presents. He brings ten presents, we give hundred presents. These exchange of presents, you be unhappy, I be unhappy. Gautama, Buddha, how you learn this technique where you don't accept any present? Sit, old man, sit. Close your eyes. Observe respiration. Observe respiration. Observe sensation, observe sensation. You must observe yourself. Unless you observe yourself, you can't come out of this problem. This is a big problem for everybody. This Bharadwaja, practicing, practicing, became an Arahant, fully enlightened person and whole life kept on serving people, kept on serving people. The whole technique is such that unless you learn equanimity at the depth of the mind where sensations are there, you can't expect the results. And when you work it that way, sensations are there and you are equanimous. Anything happening outside will bring a sensation in the body. Pleasant or unpleasant, anything that happens outside will bring a sensation in the body. And if you are equanimous with that sensation, then whatever decision you make is a healthy decision. Whatever action you take is a healthy action. It is not that this technique will make you inactive. It will make you very active. Not that I am a person, a meditator now, like a vegetable, let anybody come and cut me, I don't care. No, no. Full of life, active life. The life of reaction will go away. And reaction is always full of negativity, full of misery. Now action, action will be positive, good for you, good for others. This change will come. Many a times you will have to take very strong action, vocal, physical, very strong action. But deep inside, the mind will be full of love, full of compassion. Wherever strong action is necessary, one has to take. Like an example, a child is running towards fire or towards a poisonous snake. For the child, this is some toy to play. You can't allow. You use all your force and keep the child away. The child will be crying. The child won't like it. But you have to keep the child away. There is no anger towards the child. There is only compassion. There is only goodwill. You want to help the child, but you have to use the strength. Like a very strong person, an aggressor is harming a weak person, an aggressed person. And you say, I am a person, a meditator, I don't care. They suffer for their own karmas. No, Dhamma won't teach you that. You will take very strong action. You will stop this aggressor from taking this wrong action. If you are not a Vipassana meditator, then also you would have taken such an action, very strong action against the aggressor. But then you would have very much compassion towards the aggressed, the weaker one, and very much anger towards the aggressor. Now it is different. You have got compassion for the one who is weak, but you have got more compassion for the one who is aggressive. Ignorant person, he does not know what he is doing. He is not only harming this weak person, he is harming himself also. He is generating so much of negativity, so much of ill will, and that goes against him. He doesn't understand. And he is so ignorant. He doesn't understand the soft language. We have to use hard language. This is what you understand. This is the only language you understand. You have to take hard action, very strong hard action, but full of love, full of compassion. First you have to examine yourself. Whenever you have to take hard action, you have to examine yourself that these are the sensations, because of the situation outside, these are the sensations, and I am not reacting to sensation. And this very person against whom I am going to take hard action, I have got compassion, nothing but compassion, nothing but compassion. Then yes, the technique has started working for you. Many incidents in the life of my teacher C.R.G. Ubakhin, at times he used to take very hard action. And sometimes those who were not very close to him, they will doubt what sort of a personal teacher he is. Sometimes he shouts so strongly. How is it? But those who were very close, it was so clear to us. When he shouts, there is no trace of anger, and yet it appears as if he is very angry. Deep inside, only love, only compassion. Of course, he was a very strict disciplinarian, even in his office when he was working with the government, and so also with the centre. Whatever rules are there, discipline is there. Every student must work according to discipline, because the purpose of one's coming here is to learn and develop in dhamma. If one is not working properly, then no use. So at times he will be very strict. There are meditation cells. Somebody will come out of the meditation cell and start walking here and there. He will question, hey, what are you doing? I will say, sir, it so happened, it so happened, I came out, all right, I go back. After some time, again he comes out. Hey, what happened? And again some excuse. And when he finds this fellow is not working according to discipline, then sitting in the hall, he will say, I have used some harsh words for this person. Let me go down. And the cells are just about five or six steps below. And he goes there, knocks the door. And he shouts. And this is the shout of a great Vipassana master. It's like an earthquake. The whole Vipassana centre starts like trembling, shouts. And then comes up those four or five steps, smiling and laughing. I have shouted on this fellow. I have shouted. What kind of shout is this? So much of love. So much of compassion. So in life, many times one has to take hard decisions because the person does not understand any other language. Hard decisions, but always love, always compassion, always goodwill. If there is even a trace of ill will, you started harming yourself. How can you help others? If you can't help yourself, you can't help anybody. First you have to help yourself. Be strong to help a weak person. If you are lame, you can't support another lame person. If you are blind, you cannot show path to another blind person. First get yourself very healthy. Help yourself first and then you will start helping others. Buddha said there are four types of people I see in this world. One group of people like running from darkness towards darkness. Another group of people running from brightness to darkness. Third group of people running from darkness towards brightness. And the fourth group of people running from brightness to brightness. He never gave any sermon in mysticism. Swakhato bhagavata dhammo. The teaching is so clear. So whenever he said something which people may take different meaning, he explained it immediately. What is darkness, what is brightness, how one keeps on running from one to the other. The first group from darkness to darkness. Someone is full of misery in different ways, health wise, money wise, family wise, society wise. All around there is misery, misery, misery. This is darkness, life of darkness. There is no happiness at all. And yet every moment this person is generating nothing but anger, hatred, anger, hatred. I am in this position because of that so and so, because of so and so, because of so and so, anger towards so and so, hatred towards so and so, ill will towards so and so. Darkness is already there and one is planting seed of darkness. Misery is already there. One is planting seeds of misery. This anger, hatred, ill will will bring nothing but misery, nothing but misery. So his future is also full of misery. Present is misery, future is misery. Present is darkness, future is darkness. Second person running from brightness towards darkness. Brightness is quite happy, money wise, family wise, health wise, society wise, good status and everything. But madness, such a ego centred life, such a self centred life, hating everybody else. They are all useless fellows. I am so smart, that's why I am so happy. I have got so much money, position, power, status, hating everybody. So now he is happy. Because of some past good karmas of the past, he has got everything pleasant around. But every moment the seed that he is planting is seed of misery, misery. So from brightness this person is running towards darkness, from brightness to darkness. Third person exactly same as the first person. There is misery all around but there is wisdom inside. One keeps on smiling. Oh this misery has come because of some past bad karmas of mine. Let me settle my account. I carry on my vipassana, anicca, anicca, anicca. Somebody seems to be a reason of my misery. Certainly this person is not the reason of my misery. He has just become a vehicle. My misery was bound to come through this person or through some other person. So he generates only love and compassion towards such person. He is planting seed of love, of compassion. Now there is lot of darkness but future is brightness, brightness. Sooner or later this darkness will go and then only brightness will come. The planting of the seed now is seed of brightness. It will bring brightness, it will bring happiness. And the fourth, from brightness to brightness. All the facilities of the life are there. Money wise, health wise, society wise, family wise. But keeps on understanding, there is wisdom. All this is because of some good karmas of the past and however good karma I might have done, they are not eternal, the fruit is not eternal, going to stop. So now what I am doing now? I must make use of all this money, position, power, status that I have for the good of others. For my maintenance, for the maintenance of those who depend on me and then for the good of others, for the good of others. So all the time he is generating love, compassion, goodwill, love, compassion, goodwill. All his actions, vocal, physical, mental are for the good of others, good of others. He is planting seed of brightness. From brightness he is running towards brightness. From happiness he is running towards happiness. We should not remain in the first or the second category. We must remain in the third or the fourth. Third or fourth we can't decide. At times the life will be full of darkness because of the past karmas. At times the life will be full of brightness because of the past karmas. But we are the master of the present karma. Buddha said, attahi attano natho, attahi attano gati. You are your own master, nobody else. And you are the master of your future, nobody else. At least whatever happened in the past, happened in the past. But now, you should not generate a single sankhara which will bring misery for you. You are your master. If you are master of the present, future is nothing but the child of the present. You be master of the present and see that your present is full of dhamma, future will automatically be full of happiness. No darkness will be there for future. Develop this mastery of the present moment and this is vipasyana. Be master of the present moment. At this moment I am my own master. I won't plant any seed of misery. I won't plant any seed of darkness, only seed of brightness, seed of happiness, good for me and good for others. See that you practice it properly. The result are bound to come. Good result are bound to come. Understand the technique properly. The one day that you have to work seriously, take out as much defilements as you can and get established in the technique. You have to be aware of the sensations and equanimous with the sensation. Rest leave to dhamma. The results are bound to be good. Aware of sensation, equanimous to sensation. Aware of sensation, equanimous to sensation. Keep growing in dhamma. Keep growing in dhamma. Dhamma is so great, so wonderful. May you all get the best fruits of dhamma. May you all enjoy real happiness, real peace, real harmony, real harmony. Nithyanandeshwara Samaarambhaam Nithyanandeshwari Madhyamaam Nithyanandeshwari Madhyamaam Sai. Good. You may take rest for about five minutes and then meditate further. Take rest for about five minutes.