You have to feel the sensation, one important part of the technique. You must make your mind so sharp, so sensitive that you feel the sensations. And another part of the mind, another part of the technique, remain equanimous. Remain equanimous. Don't react. Don't react. Keep on understanding. This is Anicca. This is Anicca. And this is not a false belief. Don't accept because Buddha said so. Don't accept because the tradition says so. With your own experience, you find things arise sooner or later, they pass away. They arise, they pass away, they arise, they pass away. When everything gets dissolved, then arising and passing is with great rapidity. But the same technique, the same reality, arising, passing, arising, passing is there. It is Anicca. It is impermanent. It is impermanent. And like this, you start changing the habit pattern at the deepest level of your mind. That is very important. One has to understand this. The law of nature is such that once you stop generating new Sankharas, the old ones will start coming up on the surface and get eradicated. You remain equanimous, they will come on the surface, you remain equanimous, they come on the surface, they become weaker, weaker, weaker and get evaporated. This is law of nature. This is what was realized by this enlightened person. This was his discovery. And he said, Sankhara Pachaya Vijnana, the chain link, the Vijnana, the mind consciousness, the consciousness of the mind, every moment it arises, passes away, arises, passes away. And the nearest cause of this is Sankhara. Every time you generate a Sankhara, the Vijnana of the next moment, the consciousness of the next moment arises. Again you generate Sankhara, the consciousness arises, next moment, consciousness of the mind arises. Like this, this process goes on, goes on. At the end of the life, very strong Sankhara will raise its head and give a strong push and Sankhara and the Vijnana arises in another body and it continues, continues, continues. This truth was realized. How to stop it? So long as you keep on generating Sankharas, this flow will continue, continue. You stop generating new Sankhara, the reverse process will start automatically. One example, this flow of mind and matter, this is the flow of the life, mind and matter. For the life of the matter, for the flow of the matter, you have to give some material food. With the help of this material food, it continues, continues, continues. So also for the flow of the mind, a mental food has to be given, the Sankhara has to be given, then only it continues, continues, continues. Say one day you have not taken any food, you have fasted, you have fasted and yet the flow of life continues. You decide two days fasting, it continues, five days, ten days. One has fasted for one month, two months, ultimately the body dies because the food, you stop giving food for so long. You stop giving food for so long, then why it took so many months to die? Because the old stock was there, whatever accumulated you have, fats, etc., it started consuming that. When that was also consumed, there was no more food, it died. The same principle for the flow of mind. You keep on giving Sankhara for the food of the body, if you give even once in 24 hours, it is good enough to sustain it. But for the flow of mind, every moment a food must be given. The feeding must go every moment, every moment. And by this technique you learn, you don't give a food. This moment you have not given a food, you have just experienced, you have smiled, Anicca, neither craving, nor aversion, nor ignorance, you are just aware and not reacting, no Sankhara. Still the mind flow has not stopped, next moment, next moment again you have not given any Sankhara. Next moment again you have not given any Sankhara and yet it continues, continues, same principle how it continues with your old stock of Sankharas. When you are not given, when you are not given a new Sankhara for the flow of the life, old one has to come on the surface. It comes on the surface and a new Vijnana arises. Again you have not given any Sankhara, old one will come on the surface and new Vijnana arises and like that it flows, flows, flows. When all the Sankharas are consumed, then you are out of it, you are liberated from all the miseries. This principle is there, but only by experience one starts understanding how the old ones come on the surface, you have generated a Sankhara of anger. You will find the sensations all around are very unpleasant sensation because a biochemical reaction has started and because of this unpleasant sensation, because of this biochemical that has started flowing, again you generate anger, new Sankhara you generated. Again this biochemical gets generated and there is an unpleasant sensation and because of this unpleasant sensation, again you generate anger and this vicious circle, this is what is multiplication of your misery, continuously, continuously, continuously, Sankhara after Sankhara, Sankhara after Sankhara, you generated anger and as a result of that some biochemical reaction has started, very unpleasant sensation has started, you don't react. Again it continues for some time, you don't react, you don't react, you don't react, the habit pattern starts changing. To change the habit pattern one has to go to the depth of the sensations and don't react and you find how it starts clearing away, clearing the stock. Like example is given, you have got fuel, a heap of fuel burning firewood and there is fire, it is burning. As it is burning, you throw some more firewood on it, it is burning, you throw more firewood. The new firewood that you are giving to it, the fire starts consuming the new one and the old one remains deep inside, layers after layers, it goes increasing and the new one comes and the new one comes, you stop giving new fuel. The fire is consuming, sooner or later it will consume the whole thing and you will be out of it. People understand it in different ways, how the old ones get eradicated. The fact is it gets eradicated, how it gets eradicated? A research scientist of this part of the world came to my teacher about 30 years ago. He was a friend of my friend, so common friend. He came, he learned that in Burma there is a technique and there is a teacher who teaches you to come out of the habit pattern of negativity and live a peaceful life, harmonious life. All the accumulated defilements of the mind get eradicated by this technique and being a scientist he wanted to examine it, how it happens, he came. My teacher normally, a new student is not given more than 10 days course, but somehow he made a decision that this is a reserving case, gave him a longer course straight away and 10 days anapana, he was working on that and reaction started. So strong reaction, at times you will see that he is jumping about 6 inches from the floor while he is meditating and my teacher keeps on smiling. One day he tells me, you go and see how he is meditating. In the cell, each individual has got a meditation cell, through the lures I see and I see that he is standing on his shoulder and whole body is shaking as if he is possessed, possessed by some ghost, what's happening? I went and told my teacher, what's happening? And he smiled and he laughed, let it happen, good, it's good for him and he carried on. And later on we came to know that he is the research scholar of sky craft, he has discovered and made continental ballistic missiles with nuclear heads, such a person, what kind of sankhara, creating hell fire for millions of people to die, what kind of sankhara? It has to come that way and my teacher is smiling, let it come, let it come. At the end of the course, he feels so light, so happy, it's wonderful. And my teacher says, good, all that stuff came out and you are lighter now, he says, I am lighter, this is the fact, I feel happier, this is the fact, but I can't understand that my impurities, my defilements of the mind came out of these sensations, how can I accept it? My teacher laughed and said, good, don't accept, Buddha also used to say, don't accept, don't accept just because I say so, don't accept because the tradition says so, the scripture says so, you keep on experimenting yourself and when you understand with your own experience and you find that yes, this is true and this is good, then only accept it and he went back home and he writes a letter after a few days that this meditation has given me so wonderful result, I was such a short tempered person, so much of tension in me, always having very cross relations with those who were working under me or my superiors and even didn't have very good relationship with my wife, now everything is changed and I understand not that everything is changed, I am changed, a big change has come in me and I find everywhere it is so good, it is so good, yet I cannot understand what these sensations have got to do, how my impurities went away by sensation, I am a scientist, how can I accept it? After a few years he came again, worked again for a long course and going back home he writes a long letter with a big article, he is a metallurgist, specialist in purifying the metal, the metal used in the spacecraft etc., he says we have got a principle, a theory, a particular metal has to be purified, it must be ultra pure, even one particle, one molecule in a million molecule should not be a foreign molecule, it must be 100% pure, ultra pure and for that we melt it, then we take out a ring which is 100% pure and this hot ring we pass over this rod like shape of this metal which we want to purify and this ring because it is pure, it develops some kind of magnetism and it starts pulling out all the impurity from this rod, all the molecule, even one in a million cannot stay, it has to go out invisibly and the molecules which are there, they are in so much order, it gets so much strength, oh this is what Buddha found out, this ring of pure consciousness moving from head to feet and feet, if this ring is not pure, it doesn't work, if this ring is reacting, craving, aversion, craving, aversion, it doesn't work but because it is pure, it is not reacting, no craving, no aversion, it keeps on purifying, this is his way of understanding, different people understand in their own way but the fact is that it does purify. Somebody comes to me and tells me, well there is a principle of this batteries, we charge battery, we keep on charging, charging, charging, it gets charged, charged, charged, we stop charging, we do nothing and it starts getting discharging, discharging automatically, we do nothing for discharge, we just stop charging, oh this is also one principle. Somebody comes and tells me, you see these toys, where you twist the, you wind, you keep on winding, winding, winding and then you leave it and the toy will dance something and then unwind it, unwind it automatically, for unwinding you do nothing, you just keep on winding and Buddha gave one example, like you have a rope, two ends of the rope, you keep on twisting, twisting, twisting, twisting and suddenly leave it, it will get opened up, this is law of nature, you stop generating new Sankharas, the old one are bound to get eradicated, you keep on multiplying, you keep on generating new Sankhara after new Sankhara, the process of eradication cannot start, there is always a process of multiplication, multiplication that means process of your misery multiplied, every time the Sankhara is multiplied, every time your misery is multiplied, so simple to understand and yet so difficult people forget it and they keep on generating Sankhara after Sankhara, misery after misery, misery after misery, this is what one has to learn, be aware of the sensations and don't react to the sensations, the awareness of the sensations and not reacting to the sensations, so simple, this is the technique, you miss this and do anything else, then the result will not be there, you be with it and the result are bound to be there, little by little, little by little, your own experience will say that, like a ordinary housewife, she buys some soap or some detergent, the dirty linen is there, you use the soap, the dirt goes away, it is not the job of that housewife to see what chemical was there in this soap, which went against the dirt and how it was purified, this is the job of the research scholars, the scientists, let them do, but for an ordinary person, the misery is there, the suffering is there, because of this habit pattern of generating Sankhara after Sankhara, you stop generating Sankhara and you find you are coming out of your misery, your habit pattern is changing, people who are very much addict of their anger, they are coming out of their anger, addict of passion, they come out of their passion, addict of any kind of impurity, they start coming out of it, the result is there, so the proof is there, because you experience it and you accept it only when you start experiencing the truth, the result, which is good for you and this is what the whole life he kept on teaching, this is what he kept on teaching, equanimity, equanimity, your equanimity inside must manifest with equanimity outside, equanimity inside in your daily life, now equanimity should come, equanimity should come, vicissitudes of life will be there, the teaching was not merely for monks and for nuns, it was equally for the householders, number of householders used to come to him, one group came and told him, sir, we are not prepared to become monk or to become nun, you have to leave us householders, will the technique work for us, can we also get liberated, technique is technique for all, one becomes a monk or a nun, then there are no responsibilities of life, one can give whole life for this purpose and the result come earlier, but as a householder, there are multifarious responsibilities and with all those responsibilities, you can't give that much time, so it takes little longer, but it works, even for the householder and he gave a sermon for the householders, how the technique works for the householder, all the responsibilities of a householder, one has to look after all the responsibilities, if you are a householder, you don't run away from your responsibility, your responsibility towards your family members, towards the society, towards your relatives, all that you are performing well, performing well, at the same time, you are practicing, you are practicing and he gives 32 welfare of a family, man, family, woman, how to acquire those 32 benefits of Dhamma, one superior than the past, superior than the past and like that when he comes to the last, highest one, he says, Puthasalokadhamme Chaitanyasana Kampati Ashokam Virajam Kheemam Etam Mangalam Uttamam, this is the highest beatitude of life, what is it? Puthasalokadhamme, when you come in contact with the vicissitudes of life, ups and downs and everyone has to come in contact with vicissitudes of life, Chaitanyasana Kampati and your mind does not get shaken, it remains firm, balanced, Ashokam, you don't start crying, you don't generate unhappiness in your mind, Virajam, you don't generate any impurity in your mind, Kheemam, you don't generate a feeling of insecurity in your mind, you always feel secure, you are on the path of Dhamma, nothing can go wrong, this is the highest beatitude, equanimity with all the vicissitudes of life, all the vicissitudes of life, especially when unpleasant things are happening in the life, it is easy enough to be pleasant when the life flows along like a sweet song, but the man worthwhile is a man with a smile when everything goes dead wrong, and everything goes dead wrong so many times in our life, everything goes dead wrong, everything goes dead wrong, yet you have to smile, not like an actor or an actress, smile from inside because the sensation will be there, very unpleasant sensation will be there and you smile at the sensation, Aricha, you are also an Iccha, you are also an Iccha, let me see how long you last, and this is what the Buddha's teaching is, law of nature is, remain equanimous in every situation, all the vicissitudes of the life and you find wonderful, even in his own life, whatever he was preaching, he was practicing himself in his own life, even an enlightened person has to pass through vicissitudes of life, ups and downs are bound to come, he started teaching this Dhamma to 5 of his friends, companions, which spread to 50, which spread to 500, to 5000, and like this started spreading, spreading, spreading, nearly the entire population of northern India started practicing this in his lifetime, people get benefit, some remained very much against him, partly because they didn't understand what this person is teaching, they thought perhaps he is teaching something against our religion, our tradition, and our religion will get finished by his teaching, and partly because it was a question of livelihood for them, they were priests, and his teaching, if people start following his teaching, there is no more rites, rituals, religious ceremonies, nothing, you just observe yourself and purify yourself and live a healthy life, happy life, what these rites and rituals will do, and if there are no rites and rituals, they will miss their livelihood, so opposition was there, how to stop his preaching, there was one way in those days, there used to be big debates, public debates, and lot of hooliganism was there, gundaism was there, people will come with large number of their followers and shout, and there is no actual debate, it's more rowdism, but still that was popular there, and if somebody is defeated, then his teaching people won't accept, so they will come to fight with him, to debate, but when they come to the gate of his ashram, they start scratching their head, he is a very intelligent person, how to debate with him, not easy even rowdism because he answers so calmly, let us make our points, how to discuss, what to debate, and let one of us will be a leader, you be a leader, you be a leader, somebody says alright, I will be a leader, let's jot down all the points, you don't carry long matted hair on your head, yes, yes, in those days all the hermits, they used to have matted hair on their head.