The second day is over. You have now eight more left to work. To work diligently, ardently. Second day, slightly better than the first day. Slightly better. The difficulties are still there. What a wandering mind. A fleeting mind, a flickering mind. So unstable, so unstable, so infirm, so agitated. No peace, no tranquility. So wild, like a wild animal. A monkey mind. Grasping one branch after the other, one branch after the other. One object after the other, one object after the other. Highly agitated. Certainly very wild. Like a wild bull, a wild elephant. When it comes in the midst of a human society, dwellings of human beings, it proves so dangerous. It creates havoc, so harmful. But an experienced person, a wise person, trains this wild elephant, the wild bull. Tames this wild elephant, the wild bull. Working very patiently. Patiently and persistently. Once this wild animal is tamed, trained, all its enormous strength comes to serve the human society. It starts serving the human society. Its strength was a great danger to the human society, and now this very strength turns into a great service to the human society. Similarly, this wild mind. So long as it remains untrained, untamed, very dangerous. Very dangerous, very harmful. And if we somehow train it, tame it, its enormous strength starts helping us. And the strength of the mind, in comparison with the strength of a wild elephant, many more times it is stronger, more powerful. No one can harm us more than our own wild mind. And no one can help us more than our own trained mind, tamed mind, disciplined mind. But as it requires a lot of patience to train a wild elephant, one who is experienced in training the wild elephant or wild bull does not get irritated, does not develop anger or hatred towards this wild animal. Very patiently. One works very patiently, but persistently. Similarly, you have to deal with your wild mind very patiently. You want to get it trained in one day or two days? Oh no. No. And you become irritated because it is not getting trained? I have been given two days of my life and yet it is not getting trained. You become agitated, irritated, it becomes more wild. It becomes more dangerous. Patience. You have to work very patiently. Patiently, but persistently, persistently, continuously, continuously. Ultimately you will win. The mind is bound to get disciplined. But you have to work. No one else can work for you. You have to fight out your own battle. You have to work out your own salvation, your own liberation. None else can do that for you. Someone who has been successful in controlling the mind. Someone who has become successful in purifying the mind. Someone who has become liberated, enlightened. With all the compassion and love, this person will show the path. But you have to walk on the path. You have to take every step on the path yourself. Step by step, step by step, you have to reach the final goal. Nobody will take you on his shoulder to the final goal. Nobody can take anyone else on the shoulder and reach the final goal. Impossible. Each individual has to work. Of course, when you start taking steps on the path of Dhamma, the path of liberation, the path of enlightenment, the law of nature is such, the universal law of nature is such, that you get tuned up with the good vibrations of saintly people, good vibrations of Dhamma, and you get all the inspiration and the strength. You start getting so much support. I know it with my own personal experience. And also the experience of so many students. You will get support. You call it grace, you call it mercy, you call whatever you like. You will get support. But still, every step you have to take on the path, you have to take every step on the path. An incident in the life of Gautama the Buddha, at that time he was dwelling in a big meditation center in the city of Sravasti, capital of the state of Kusala. A large number of monks and nuns will come and learn Vipassana from him. A large number of householders, men, women will come and learn this technique from him, get benefited. Someone who used to come only in these evening discourses, but never practiced, he came one day a little earlier, when Buddha was alone, came to him, paid respect, and said, Sir, one question keeps on bothering me, and I hesitate to ask you when there are so many people around. Now that you are alone, permit me to ask the question. Oh, go ahead. There should not be any confusion in your mind so far as Dhamma is concerned. Go ahead. And he said, Sir, I am coming here for a number of years. I understand what you teach. It is good. But I examine the people who come here to learn. I have noticed that some of them have really become fully liberated, fully enlightened. It is quite clear with their behavior, with their lifestyle, with their dealings with these people, situations, it is very clear they are liberated people. And quite a few are not fully liberated, and yet a big change has come in their life. I notice it. A big change for the better has come. But then, Sir, there are people like me. No change. We are as we were. My question is, Sir, you are so powerful. You are so compassionate. Somebody is coming to you, taking refuge in you. Why don't you use all your power and your compassion to liberate us? Why does somebody remain unliberated or half liberated? Please, Sir, this question bothers me. Buddha smiled. This is what he kept on teaching, but people do not want to understand what can he do. So he explained. And his way of explanation was always different according to the caliber of the mind of the student who has come. At times he will answer by counter-questioning. So in this case also, he started counter-questioning. Hey, from where are you? Sir, I am from Shravasti, this city, the capital of Kosala. Oh, no, no. Your facial features say that you are not from this country. You are from some other state, and you have come and settled down here. Oh, yes, Sir, you are quite correct. Actually, I belong to Magadha, Rajgiri. I have come and settled down here last few years. Good. Having come and settled down here, have you severed all relations with Rajgiri, with Magadha? You don't go there anymore? Oh, no, Sir, I keep going there. I still have my relatives there, I have my friends there, I have my business there. I keep going there. Every year I go many times to Rajgiri and come back. I see. You keep going from here to Rajgiri. So certainly you must be knowing very well the path from here to Rajgiri, because you have walked over the path so many times. Yes, Sir, I know the path so well. Now tell me, having settled down in this part of the country, you must have made many friends, and out of these many friends some have become very intimate to you, isn't it? Yes, Sir, some have become very intimate. Those who are very intimate, they certainly should be knowing that you don't belong to this part, you are actually from Magadha, from Rajgiri, and you have come and settled down here. And they also must be knowing that you keep going to Rajgiri and coming back every year so many times. Yes, Sir. Then these people know that you know the path from here to Rajgiri very well. Yes, Sir. Some of them must be asking you, how about this path, what kind of path? Do you keep it a top secret or do you explain? What top secret, Sir? I explain them very clearly. You start from here, from Sravasti, start moving eastwards, and you move this way, that way, you turn this way, that way, and you reach Varanasi, and then you keep moving this way, that way, turn here, there, you will reach Gaya, and then you keep moving this, and you will reach Rajgiri. I explain the whole path very clearly, very clearly. That means everyone to whom you explain the path must have reached Rajgiri. How is that possible, Sir? If someone has not walked on the path, how will he reach Rajgiri? Young man, this is what I keep on telling every day. People come to me, understanding very well that this is a person who is fully liberated. He has reached the final goal. He knows the path from here to the final goal. They come to me. They ask me what is the path. Why I keep it as a top secret? I explain them very clearly. This is how you walk, this is how you walk, and you will get this station and this station, and you keep walking, keep walking, and you will reach the final goal. Someone just listens, and says Sadhu, Sadhu, Sadhu, and bows down three times, but won't take a single step on the path. How will this person reach the goal? What can I do? I have shown the path. My job is done. Somebody has started taking steps on the path. Someone has taken just one step on the path. This person is one step nearer the goal. Someone has taken 100 steps on the path. This person is 100 steps nearer the goal. Someone has taken all the steps on the path, has reached the goal. Each individual has to take steps on the path. No one else can do that. No one else. If I am thirsty, and someone else drinks water, my thirst will not get quenched. For quenching my thirst, I must drink water. If I am sick, and someone else takes medicine, my sickness will not get cured. I have to take medicine myself. So simple, and yet, we don't want to work. And we just expect some other supernatural power to be very kind, to do something for us. It doesn't work. It doesn't work. Each individual has to work out one's own salvation. Each individual has to take every step on the path. And he explains, in his own words, the Pali, the language that he spoke, the language of India of those days. TUME HIKI CHANG A TAPAM AKHA TARO TATHA GATA TUME HIKI CHANG A TAPAM You, you have to work diligently, ardently for your liberation. Someone who has become Tathagata, that means one has become liberated, the literal meaning Tathagata, one has reached the final goal of ultimate truth, the eternal truth, one has reached that goal, will very compassionately point out to the path, this is the path. AKHA TARO, he will just point out, this is the path. AKHA TARO TATHA GATA Everyone who has reached that goal will only point out the path. But each individual has to walk on the path, each individual has to work out one's own salvation, if this is accepted. And earlier one accepts it the better. One accepts that I have to walk on the path, every step I have to take to reach the final goal. Then the question comes, what is the path? And how to walk over it? And he explained. He kept on explaining. This is what he did the whole life. Kept on explaining the path. The Dhamma. Dhamma means law. Dhamma means truth. Dhamma means nature. The law of nature. Universal law of nature, which governs the entire universe, animate, inanimate, is never sectarian. Universal. One has to understand, what is this law? What is this nature? One has to understand that if I break the law, I get punished, then and there. If I live a life in line with the law, in accordance to the law, I start getting rewarded. I start moving towards the final goal of liberation. And this is the path. Someone came to him and asked him, He answered in few words. Few simple words. Tell me, what is the path? I can't understand high philosophies and all that. And Buddha smiled. Dhamma is not for high philosophies. It is for people to practice. So they must understand what it is. If they don't understand, and simply play intellectual game with it, it doesn't help. He always explained in very simple words. All right, I will again explain to you. And he explained in few words. Again in his own words. In the language that he spoke in those days. Sachet Pariyodapanam Etam Buddhanasasanam Etam Buddhanasasanam Sasanam is the teaching. Buddhana, all the Buddhas. This is the teaching of all the Buddhas. I never said this is my teaching. Buddha is not a name of somebody. Buddha means an enlightened person, a liberated person. His name was Gautama. And to become Buddha, is not mahalopani of only one person. Not just only Gautama can become Buddha. Anyone can become Buddha. Of course, it is not that easy. No. Very hard work. Very hard work. Yet, doing hard work, hard work, hard work, there is every possibility of everyone becoming a fully enlightened person, becoming Buddha. And when someone becomes a Buddha, he will teach this and nothing else. This will be the teaching of every enlightened person. What is it? Sab papasya ekaranam Ekaranam, abstain. Sab, all. Papasya, all sinful activities. Abstain from all sinful activities, unwholesome activities. And kusalasya upasampada. Perform wholesome actions, pious actions. Enter the field of piety, upasampada. Get ordained in piety, upasampada. And say, chitteh pariyodapanam. Keep on purifying your mind. Keep on purifying your mind. That's all. Abstain from unwholesome, sinful actions. Perform wholesome, pious actions. And keep on purifying your mind. The entire Dhamma in totality is contained in it. Nothing is missing. You won't have to add anything to this. That is why it is called paripunnam, complete. It is complete. And you won't have to take out anything from it. There is not even a dot which is wrong which has to be taken out. That is why it is called parisuddham, so pure. Ultra-pure. Nothing to take out from it. Nothing to add to it. This is Dhamma. Abstain from sinful actions. Perform pious actions. Purify the mind. Every religion worth the name will say the same thing. But then, when an enlightened person teaches Dhamma, he teaches a universal Dhamma. He will never teach sectarian. Universal Dhamma. Eternal Dhamma. The law of nature is eternal. It was there so in the past, it is so present, it will be so in the future. And it is applicable to one and all. That is Dhamma. But out of madness, out of ignorance, people forget the essence of Dhamma, and they make a sect out of it. Then this sect, or this sect, or this sect. Then these very words will start carrying different meanings. Everyone will recite the same thing. Abstain from sinful action. No religion will say you keep on performing sinful actions. Everyone will say the same thing. Perform wholesome action, pious action. Every religion, every tradition will say that. Purify your mind. Every religion, every tradition, everyone will say that. But yet, a big difference. A big difference in the explanations. What is sin? And what is piety? When Dhamma turns into a sect, then that particular sect, the so-called religious people of that particular sect, the so-called pious people of this particular sect, they may be wearing this kind of robe or that kind of robe, may be having this rosary or that rosary, may be having this mark over the forehead or that mark over the forehead, this external appearance or that external appearance. Now people belonging to this particular sect will say those who have this kind of external appearance are pious people. Others are not. Definition is given, a wrong definition is given. Another definition. Every sect, people belonging to that particular sect will perform this kind of rite or that kind of ritual, this religious ceremony or that religious ceremony. Every sect will have different rites, different rituals.