Aspirations and you want this person to fulfill those dreams You are dreaming that this person will fulfill my dream such-and-such dream and that's why you are loving Your love is expecting something in return and when your love is expecting something in return You are not loving this person. You are loving yourself. You are loving your own aspirations. You're loving your own dreams Self-centered love it doesn't help pure love is just one way traffic you give you don't expect anything in return You just give just give where a Vipassana meditator starts realizing that then one starts coming out of this selfishness This narrow-mindedness. So now what happened in the fourth time this son of mine So much dream was taken when he grows he will be son of a Vipassana teacher So he will be serving him like anything He'll be so obedient like this and like that and now my Sanya says these words are from your son My son abusing me Ordinary person on the street whom I didn't know and with whom I had no dreams for future. This person abuses me I don't like it, but it doesn't have much effect my son. He abuses me. Oh, it becomes so unbearable Now fifth time why it is much more and unbearable Because the same mistake I keep on doing the image of my son as I try to establish my image in the minds of others I try to establish the image of my son my daughter my wife my so my so so wonderful They may have some defect, but I keep on covering the defect. Oh, no. No, no, they're so wonderful. So wonderful Now the images I establish in the mind of five of my students about my son those images got shattered I am five times more unhappy All that will become very clear when you learn when you know how to observe your sensation something has happened What kind of sensation something has happened what kind of sensation this is how vipashyana will help you Unless you make use of vipashyana in your daily life Then it will become like any other organized religion one goes to a temple one goes to a church one goes to a pagoda one Goes to a mosque performs this right that right feels very happy. I'm a very religious person I'm a very religious person. It doesn't help in the life Deluding oneself if vipashyana is also made that way I take one course every year I sit morning or evening and my duty is over now. Let Buddha do something for me He will do because I am doing his job. He told me to do this. I am doing it Now it is his job to save me from all misery doesn't work. It is changing your own habit pattern Understanding at the depth how you are making yourself miserable Moment to moment you are creating only misery for you either craving either aversion either craving or aversion this sensation that sensation craving aversion craving aversion a bundle of misery and by this technique you are coming out of this mad habit coming out of your misery a Purpose to come to a course like this Should not be taken like a right or a ritual. There must be a purpose for your coming and the main purpose is that you Understand the reality of mind and matter within yourself at the experiential level and every time you come you are developing certain qualities in you and Those qualities will help you to reach the final goal of full liberation In the language of the past in Buddha's language There are ten such good qualities and when you fulfill those qualities you reach the final goal easily They are called parami Parami is a quality Which helps you to the cross to cross the ocean of misery and this the other shore free from all misery There are ten paramis and one gets wonderful opportunity coming to a course like this to develop all the ten paramis little by little little by little like your ten jars ten pots and Even if you put one drop one drop in each Drop by drop drop by drop a time will come and all these jars will get filled fulfilled and you reach the final goal What are these ten paramis? What are these ten qualities? Remember them so that next time you come you be very careful that you put at least one drop in each jar more the better one parami Nikkama parami a parami of renunciation One is to renounce the householder's life So that there is no attachment left Everyone is not prepared to renounce the householder's life Everyone cannot become a monk or a nun Then how to develop this parami and it is important parami then this wonderful opportunity For ten days, although one has not shaven the head and one has not changed the robes But for all practical purposes one lives a life of a monk one lives a life of a nun Because in courses like this You live on the charity of others Whatever food you take is charity of others Whatever facility you have is charity of others and what for one becomes a monk or a nun? There is nothing to say mine mine mine The whole all these paramis are to take you to the stage where? Entire ego gets dissolved the final stage of egolessness takes you to the final goal And with renunciation one becomes a monk and with the begging bowl in the hand Ask food from house to house the ego starts getting Dissolved dissolved you get a wonderful opportunity here Initially when courses were started In India and for some time here also when we didn't have our centers Then one mistake was there we couldn't rectify and it took time to rectify Charges were Taken from the students no charges for the teaching because teaching is so invaluable what charges can give what charges can anybody give? But at least for boarding lodging the actual expenses out-of-pocket expenses were charged from the students. It was wrong But once the center started coming up around the world Then the dhamma started being taught in its pure way pure form if money is charged Then you don't get this parami of renunciation Because all the time you feel I am paying for it and when you take your meals. Oh, this is not to my taste I paid for it. No, that's not good. I want that. I want that your ego is there Otherwise like a monk like a nun whatever comes in the begging bowl beggars have no choice You get it you eat it. You're happy with that. You are dissolving your ego very important for that purpose No charges should be taken no charges of teaching. No charges of boarding. No charges of lodging When we first gave this idea to the people in India All the trust is where when the court when the center was established they were so afraid what going Kaji? What you are doing? This is such a poor country people don't get meals for days together and you are giving free meals here. There'll be such a big crowd I Said don't worry. Let them come they were to work from morning 4 4 30 till night 9 9 30 If they work doesn't matter If they come only for meals, then they won't work then they have to run away So doesn't matter and doesn't matter nothing happened. It went perfectly. All right people came to work seriously Same thing here. Also when I started in the West People said well in the West People will suspect you why you are not charging even for food. There's something wrong some Intention wrong intention is there or you are supported by some government or some intelligence group or something Something is happening. Otherwise, how somebody can give free boarding free lodging how that is possible not possible So this doubt won't allow people I say this doubt will go we don't worry and look it is going away So Dhamma when it is taught in its pure form It's so helpful to the students and it helps them to develop this parmy Renunciation parmy one feels I'm a monk here for 10 days. I am a monk. I am a nun I have to live like a monk like a nun on the charity of others and this helps them another parmy Sheila parmy The five precepts that you take here. You are supposed to observe them outside also But it is so difficult in outside world you keep on breaking this or breaking there Although it may be due to the environment Because you are kept busy from morning 4 4 30 till night 9 9 30. There's no opportunity for you to break So at least for for 9 days or 10 days you keep your Sheila so perfect When you start talking 10th day tomorrow Slight danger is there That's why silence for 9 days to observe this Sheila when you start talking you may exaggerate something Or you may hide something and your Sheila is broken. So at least for 9 days perfect Sheila you get this wonderful parmy and The next parmy is vidya Affords as a householder one has to make a food But every effort one does makes is to earn money for livelihood. Yes one has to work But coming to a course like this The vidya is the real vidya a vidya to purify your mind a vidya to live a good life All the efforts that you make are the efforts to purify your mind to purify your mind This goes to your credit the credit of parmy vidya parmy And the next Panya parmy wisdom Staying at home. Also reading scriptures Going and listening to some dhamma discourses somewhere you get wisdom Suta maya panya chintan maya panya, but that is not parmy parmy is bhavana maya panya You have to live the life of wisdom living wisdom and all that happens while you are here for 10 days Living wisdom you are experiencing wisdom You are experiencing the truth of the things inside and you are experiencing the law of nature inside and you are Experiencing how to live in line with the law of the nature. This becomes your parmy the panya parmy Another parmy khanti parmy tolerance tolerance Coming to a course like this 100 students or 200 students sitting together meditating You try not to disturb others But somebody starts disturbing you somebody starts coughing Somebody starts burping Somebody starts hiccuping Something happens and you feel so irritated mad fellows Why they are disturbing others? And then suddenly you realize oh, I have come here not to generate negativity I must generate only compassion love this person is ignorant or this person is a sick person Why generate negativity and you come out of this negativity you learn how to develop your parmy of of tolerance khanti khanti khanti And the next parmy parmy of truth truth At the vocal level is a good parmy, but here at a deeper subtler level Every step on the path must be with the truth truth truth that you experience Not the truth experienced by gautama the buddha or the truth experienced by jesus christ or the truth experienced by your teacher nothing doing Your own experience from moment to moment moment to moment. This will take you to the final goal of ultimate truth So truth truth truth this parmy becomes stronger stronger stronger Adityan parmy strong determination Somebody comes to a course like this the first thing one does Strong determination. I will stay here for 10 days. Let anything happen I won't run away on the second day. I won't run away on the sixth day. I won't run away on any day I will be here for 10 days any kind of operation is acceptable to me Another adityan one takes I will observe all the rules regulations discipline timetable And this adityan helps Another adityan which comes after vipashyana you sit for one hour three times You don't change your legs. You don't open your hands. You don't open your eyes so much of pain and yet you fulfill it That parmy is a wonderful parmy And it is so helpful in the long run Understand when this person became fully enlightened That night when he sat under the tree He said with the adityan with the strong determination that I won't change my posture Not till one hour or two hours till I become fully enlightened It may take years together That all my bones get scattered. I don't mind. I won't change my posture And if you come to that stage and you sit And 10 minutes a pain starts you said no, no, no. No, I will sit later on I will sit later on So for lives together you have to develop this parmy this parmy for the adityan adityan adityan So that when your time comes you sit with the strong determination and come out successful. Very important. Very important Another parmy Tomorrow you will learn this technique Love for all beings love for all beings compassion for all beings Well, we are taught from the childhood love thy neighbor love thy neighbor So we keep on saying at the surface level. May you be happy? Oh my neighbor May you be happy may you be happy but we have got so much negativity towards this person deep inside We keep on saying you go to hell. Oh my neighbor you go to hell. You are so bad That doesn't work that doesn't become a parmy Because deep inside your unconscious mind is much stronger than the surface level mind So when you keep on giving metta only at the surface level it doesn't work it doesn't become your parmy this technique For nine days you keep on keep on purifying your mind keep on purifying your mind keep on breaking the barrier The barrier between the surface mind and the inside mind and then tomorrow on the 10th day you learn this Myth may all beings be happy may all beings share my peace my harmony Then there is no trace of negativity and you are learning the real myth which which goes to your credit as a parmy and the next upekkha With all the experiences that you have here upekkha equanimity equanimity equanimity Whatever experience you have pleasant unpleasant neutral equanimity you get a wonderful opportunity Otherwise in the life when ups and downs are coming vicissitudes are coming you may have equanimity But that equanimity will be at the surface level of the mind But now you are experiencing at the depth of the mind the sensations are experienced by the deepest level of the mind And you are training this deepest level of the mind to remain equanimous This becomes your parmy and the next Donation As a householder It is very difficult for a householder to reach the final goal. Why? main difficulty is That a householder is not supposed to go and beg food A monk and nun should go out and beg food a householder has to work hard very hard work honestly and earn money Support oneself support those who are depending on support others. This is the responsibility of a householder Once you start working and you start earning Then the ego gets inflated. Look, I am such a smart person I am such a clever person. I am so intelligent and that is why I am successful others are not successful I earn this much I earn that much money that comes Develop so much of ego in the mind and so long as the ego is there You are far away from the final goal of full liberation Now how to come out of this ego on the one hand one has to earn money And on the other hand every money that comes generates ego in you That is why the saintly people the enlightened people they advise that whenever you earn You keep on understanding that you are not earning for yourself Of course you are earning for your own maintenance and the maintenance of all those who depend on you But you are also earning for others for others Others have got share in my earning then the ego becomes less less less less it won't be that strong In a course like this 10 days are over One has been dissolving the ego dissolving the ego purifying the mind purifying the mind Then whatever donation one gives according to one's own capacity less or more is a material gives you the purity of mind Not expecting anything in return. Even this dana becomes very impure when you expect something in return Your love becomes very impure when you expect something in return Your service to others becomes very impure if you expect something in return So also the dana becomes very impure if you expect something in return I have given so much dana So there must be one Bungalow made for me whenever I come I must be there all efforts all comforts for me when i'm not there All right, let others others use it doesn't matter. But when I come And first admission I must always get admission all those Expecting something in return or I have given so much dana So on this bungalow or on this structure, my name should be written donated by Goenka the great Goenka All that madness because one doesn't know what dhamma is This is what one has been doing the whole life Working here for nine days for ten days dissolving ego dissolving ego Oh, whatever I am giving is for the good of others As I got so much benefit because somebody gave for me Somebody gave this charity and that is why I got all this wonderful dhamma, which is so good for me May similarly more and more people get benefit from it. So the charity that comes from the mind of purity Just helping others Seeing others coming out of the misery this goes to your credit as a parmy Otherwise if the ego gets built up then it is no more parmy all these 10 parmies You get wonderful opportunity coming to a course like this Coming to a course like this To meditate purify your mind and develop all the 10 parmies People come to give 10 days service in such courses and those who come for 10 days service They are developing the same 10 parmies. They get an opportunity here serving here They find that how they are developing their parmy this Developing of the parmy drop by drop in these 10 jars 10 pots big pots or small pots If you are going to become a fully enlightened person the jar is too big It takes time doesn't matter but otherwise full liberation comes even with smaller jar But all these 10 jars must be filled all the 10 parmies must be complete And that completion you get a wonderful opportunity coming to a course like this Make best use next time whenever you come to the course keep in mind that I am going to the course Not for a rite not for a ritual not for religious ceremony. I am going to fulfill my own parmies I am going to make a change in my life and a change for better And then you keep on applying it in life. All these 10 parmies will come to help in your daily life also Not at the final goal time. They will be helping you every time in your every life Any problem comes you will find one parmy or the other is coming to help you because these are all good qualities a pure mind must have those good qualities and you are By practicing you are developing those very qualities May all your 10 parmies develop Develop get fulfilled. May you all reach the final goal May you all experience liberation liberation from the bondages the shackles the chains of all the defilements So that you enjoy real peace real harmony Real happiness real happiness Uh So Um Um So You may take rest for about five minutes and then again start working again start working You