All the power one tries to correct somebody, amend somebody, where is the guarantee that somebody else will not raise the head and start doing something against your wishes? Impossible. You can't change the whole world, but you can certainly change yourself, certainly change yourself. There is a saying in our country, the path is full of thorn, full of thorn, full of pebbles. You try to clean it, very difficult, and you walk, the thorn will trouble you, the pebbles will trouble you. The best thing, wear shoes and walk over it, you are protected, you don't worry about this thorn, they will remain, let them be there. There is sun, very strong sun, and you want the sun not to be so strong, it's too hot for me. You can't do anything, take your umbrella, take the shade and run, doesn't matter. So you protect yourself, and protecting yourself is just to observe what is wrong inside. This is what you have started doing by practicing Vipassana. Unless you understand the truth, the totality of the truth, you always remain deluded. Panya, the literal meaning of the word Panya, pakarena jnane te te panya, you understand things from different angles. If you try to understand the problem only from one angle, it's a partial truth, and partial truth is always distorted truth, it does not help you. When you see the same problem from different angles, you are coming nearer and nearer to the totality of the truth, then the delusion goes away. Then your decisions are good, your actions are good, because you are with the totality of the truth. One story of the past, five birth blind people were brought near an elephant, they had never seen an elephant, blind from birth. And they were asked to examine the elephant and say what an elephant is. Someone caught hold of the foot of the elephant, the leg of the elephant, I know it's like a post, for him it's like a post. Someone caught hold of the tail of the elephant, it's like a brush, a broom, for him elephant is a brush, a broom, like that all five of them gave their definition of elephant, which is true, but partial truth, far away from the actual truth. Like this if we keep on seeing things only from one angle, then it's only a partial truth, a distorted truth, all our decisions will go wrong. Vipassana starts helping you, the panya starts helping you to see things from different angle. One very important angle which was missing from the time one has taken birth, opened eyes, only seeing outside, outside, outside, one never cared to see what is happening inside. Now vipassana has given you another angle, something has happened outside, let me see what is happening inside. So you are not with the distorted truth, only one angle, at least you got two angles now, outside, inside, and as you progress you will have more angles to see things. But this angle, seeing things inside, is such an important angle. Now you find the cause of your misery, 100% cause of your misery outside, but as you progress on the path and you start observing things inside, very soon you will reach the stage where you will start saying, yes something happened outside, but also something happened inside, so cause of my misery is 50% outside, 50% inside, alright. You started sharing the responsibility 50%, you do something to change yourself 50%, doesn't matter. A time is bound to come if you really practice vipassana, a time is bound to come when you start realizing 100% cause lies inside, not even quarter percent is outside, 100% cause of my misery is inside. Nothing outside can make me miserable, as nothing outside can make me happy, 100% cause of my real happiness lies inside, 100% cause of my misery lies inside, then you start working inside. You give all importance to inside and the whole life pattern will change, you will come out of your misery so easily, because you started seeing things inside. Somebody has done something which has harmed you, somebody has done great injustice to you. An example, you take your case to the court, I don't know how it is in this part of the world, back in our country when something goes to the court, litigation, it takes years together from this court to that court, to appellate court, etc., etc., and then reaches the federal court, the supreme court, it takes 7 years say. Seven years the case went to the supreme court and the chief justice of the supreme court went to all the papers and all the evidences and gave decision that the other person is 100% at fault, you have got no fault and he should be punished, alright? He has given a punishment according to the law of the country. But if I am a wise person, I start thinking, if there was no fault, no fault on my part, supreme court just says I have got no fault, then why I suffered for this 7 years? 7 years day and night, I have no peace of mind, there must be some law of nature, some law of God Almighty, why I was penalized? With the way you start understanding why you were penalized, you are responsible, every moment you are boiling with negativity, so and so did like this, so and so did, you are responsible. You kept on boiling yourself, somebody comes and abuses you, just an incident, somebody has come and abused you, he is your enemy, he doesn't want to see you happy, he wants to see you unhappy, that's why he has abused, he has insulted, he has abused you once, made you unhappy and gone away and now what happens? He just wanted you to be unhappy only once because he abused only once and now what happens? You say, alright, shake hands, you want me to be unhappy, I will remain unhappy for hours together, for days together, for years together, sometimes you say that he insulted me so much, I don't forget for the whole life, don't forget for the whole life, whom are you obliging? You will keep on rolling in misery, hell misery for whole life, I don't forget for seven lives, seven lives in hell, madness, what we are doing? In the first instance it was a mistake on our part, somebody brought a present of abuse and we accepted it, when somebody is abusing, it is the problem of this person, his problem, your problem, full of negativity, this is his misery, why share that misery, why take that misery on you? Just smile like Buddha, alright, I have not accepted your present, you have to suffer for that, you have to suffer for that, I can't suffer for you, I won't suffer, that itself was a big mistake and then you kept on rolling, you kept on remembering, he insulted me like this, she insulted me like this, you keep on staging that drama on the platform of your mind again, again, again, years together, no one else is responsible for that, you yourself responsible for that, as you examine more and more the reality inside, things will become so clear, so clear, I am responsible, whenever I react, I bring misery to me, I don't react, whatever happens outside, I am not miserable, I can smile, so the entire responsibility lies with me deep inside, I change my own habit pattern, I become free from misery, I start living a better life, but that requires lot of practice, things become easier, if you practice Vipassana properly, this material structure, how it is working, how biochemical reactions are coming, because of the different sensations are coming, how the mind, the four parts of the mind, the Vijnana, recognising part of the mind is working, the Sannya, the recognising part is working, the Vedana, the feeling part is working and the Sankhara, the reacting part is working, how they are working, if you keep on observing them, you will notice that the fourth part, the Sankhara part, the reacting part has become so strong for you and the first part, the Vijnana, just recognising, remaining, observing things objectively has become so weak, so weak and the fourth has become so strong, oh, this is the reason of your misery and by the practice of Vipassana, you will find the fourth part, the Sankhara becomes weaker, weaker, weaker, even if you react, it is like a line drawn on the water, it won't be so deep and the first part, observing, observing, observing objectively becomes stronger, stronger, stronger, you are coming out of your misery easily, otherwise if the practice of Vipassana is not done properly, the results, you can't expect the results that you should get by practice of Vipassana, as you keep on observing the reality, it becomes so clear, where the mistake is, where the misery starts, how the misery starts, otherwise one keeps on saying, whenever I see this person, I start generating negativity, is it so? That means, something wrong in this person, the biochemistry of this person is such that your biochemistry starts changing and generate negativity, if that is so, then everyone who sees this person must generate negativity, it doesn't happen, the same person seen by five at the same time, one generates negativity, anger, other may generate passion, the third may generate fear, the fourth may generate something else, all five generating different things, oh, then it becomes clear, it is not there, something wrong in me, each individual has one's own problem, an example, a artist, a very good artist, on a canvas with his or her brush and the ink, draws a picture, a very beautiful image comes out, very beautiful, starts looking at that image, how wonderful, this person is so wonderful, and then loses the balance of the mind, I want to live with this person, I must live with this person, so beautiful person, and people say, you are a mad fellow, your own creation, your own imagination, there is no truth in it, and you want to live with this picture, how is that possible? Oh, no, I can't live without this person, I must get this person, mad fellow, similarly, the same artist may draw another picture, very horrible, very ferocious, oh, this person is so bad, so ferocious, he will eat me, he will devour me, please save me, please save, people say, mad fellow, your own creation, your own imagination, what you are doing? We can say, this artist is a mad fellow, but each one is playing the same game, each one keeps on drawing pictures, and then keep on reacting to those pictures, each one keeps on carving images, and then keeps on reacting to those images, all imaginary pictures, imaginary carvings, and yet, what a great reaction is there. One example, twenty years back, twenty years back, somebody said something or did something that I did not like, that means, my Sanya did not like, my Sanya said, very bad, and as soon as the Sanya said, very bad, Sankhara reacted, very bad person, negativity arose, and I carved an image of this person, very bad fellow, very bad fellow, for twenty years I have not seen him, after twenty years, with the interval of twenty years, I see the same person, and I start reacting, very bad fellow, very bad fellow, oh, in twenty years he might have become a saintly person, who knows, and even the first instance, it was only my Sanya which said, very bad fellow, actually he might not have been bad, who knows, my own creation, I have carved an image of this person, very bad fellow, very bad fellow, so I am reacting to this image, created by me, carved by me, this comes between the reality of this person, and my reaction, this comes in between, and I am reacting to this. Similarly, another example, twenty years back, somebody said something or did something, which I liked, that means, my Sanya liked, ah, wonderful, and the evaluation was given, ah, wonderful person, a thorough gentleman, a thorough gentleman, what a saintly person, twenty years, I have not seen him, with the interval of twenty years, I see, that image comes, ah, thorough gentleman, he might have become a devil, during these twenty years, he might have changed so much, and who knows, in the first instance, he might have been a devil, only my Sanya said, a very thorough gentleman, very good gentleman, I am reacting to my own images. That reality will become clearer and clearer, if you start examining, how your four parts of the mind are working, how the interaction of the body, the material structure, interaction is going on, and all that will become so clear, if you just observe objectively, objectively, objectively, same person, same object, seen by five different persons, five different persons are good, five different images of the same person, they are reacting to their own images, not to this person. Even the same object, it comes to me, comes in contact with my sense door, eyes or ears or anywhere, five different times, the same object, and yet I react in five different ways, the same object, say certain words come to my ear, five times, same words have come, and I have reacted in five different ways, if I am a good Vipassana meditator, it will become so clear, an example, example is example, no reality in it, just example. One evening I am walking, I am walking with five of my students, it's evening, little dark, on the footpath somebody is lying there, and one of my students hits this person, kicks this person, and this person shouts, are you blind, you got eyes or button holes, these words come to my ear, and I find a wonderful sensation in my body, very pleasant sensation, a flow of very pleasant sensation, somebody is abused, you got eyes or button holes, and I am getting very pleasant sensation, one incident. Second incident, I am going alone, I have hit this person, and he shouts the same language, the same words, the same tone, are you blind, you got eyes or button holes, now I find no pleasant sensation, no pleasant sensation, unpleasant sensations are there. Third incident, again example is example, I am going and with me my five students, and again I have hit, I have hit, and again he shouted, same words, are you blind, you got eyes or button holes, and I find the unpleasant sensation is more severe than last time, same words but yet such difference. Fourth time, just an example, again I am walking, I have hit the person, again the same tone he has shouted, are you blind, you got eyes or button holes, and suddenly I realize these are the words of my son, my son, my son abusing me, are you blind, you got eyes or button holes, oh the sensation becomes so unpleasant, so unpleasant. Fifth time, again example is example, I am walking with five of my students, I have hit this person, he has shouted in the same way, I have recognized my son, oh now it is totally unbearable, unbearable, why? The same words came to the ears five times and why it is so different? What happens? A good Vipassana meditator will start understanding what happens. The first time, first time when these words came, my sannyas says, yes these are words of abuse, but not for you, not for you, they are for your students, and these students, I keep on teaching them, be aware, be aware, walk with aware, walk with mindfulness, and they are so immature, they have not understood anything, hit somebody and they have to suffer this abuse. I am a Vipassana teacher, I can't make such mistake, look, this abuse is not for me, it is for my student, and there is a pleasant sensation throughout. As soon as one takes birth and grows and comes to senses, whether one comes to senses or loses senses, who knows, but in the worldly language we say one comes to senses, the first thing one does, carves an image, image of oneself, I, Goenka, and when I carve my own image, I carve very beautiful, beautiful Goenka, wonderful Goenka, wonderful Goenka, and I establish this image in the temple of my mind, wonderful, Goenka is so wonderful. Now first time, when I found that abuse is to my students who are immature, I am a matured person, I am a Vipassana teacher, then this image got some more shiny over it, some more polish, ah wonderful, Goenka is so wonderful, he cannot make mistakes, others make mistakes. Second time, the same abuse, and my sannyas says it is for you now, not for your student, there is no student here, and this image that was carved and attachment towards this image, and this image gets shattered, somebody, somebody abusing me, such a Vipassana teacher, me, what happened to you? You are not bleeding, you are not dying away, what's wrong, why you shout? The whole attitude changes now, very unpleasant sensation starts. And third time again, why it was much more? Because these five students who were with me. One keeps on making this madness, one carves one's image and establishes in one's own mind, develops lot of attachment, that itself is madness. Now another thing that one keeps on doing, establishes a good image of oneself in the minds of others. Every student must know, Goenka is wonderful, oh look, Goenka is wonderful, and that image, one plays so many dramas and so many things, just to establish a good image. These five students, I have done so much to establish my good image in the minds of these five students. Now all these five students, the image is shattered, previously only one image was shattered, now five images getting shattered, I feel so unhappy, five times more unhappy. Somebody abuses me when I am alone, I say it doesn't matter, he has abused me. But in public, with so many people, what makes the difference, abuse is abuse, whether you are alone or whether you are with so many other people, because you have put your image in the minds of so many people, and now that gets shattered, you are much more unhappy. That becomes clearer and clearer as you go deeper and make analytical study of the things. Fourth time, why it is more unhappy? I, I, the sphere of I increases now, mine, mine, mine, and you start making images of mine, my son, my daughter, my wife, my husband, my mother, my father, my so, my so, my so, and you carve a beautiful image, and you start developing tremendous amount of attachment. At the apparent level, you keep on fooling yourself, I love my son, I love my wife, I love my husband, I love my mother, I love my father. If you go deeper, you will understand you don't love anybody. At the time of Buddha, the king of the country, Pasenjit, he came in contact with Buddha, meditated, became a good Vipassana meditator. And one member of the family becomes good meditator, others slowly get attracted, so the whole family was a Vipassana meditator. His wife Mallika, the queen, she also very good meditator. Both of them meditate in their meditation room in the palace. One day, after one hour sitting, this king asked the queen, Mallika, tell me, whom do you love the most in the world? And she says, wonderful. The same question came in my mind while I was meditating, and I realized, I love myself. I don't love anybody. I don't, I don't love anybody. Pasenjit smiled, he said, the same question came to my mind, I examined myself, I found I love only myself. I don't love anybody. Without Vipassana, I could have been totally different. A queen saying to the king that I don't, I love only myself, not you, her head would have been taken off. What kind of queen? But now both are Vipassana meditators, very happy. They went to Buddha and said, sir, in meditation it so happened, Buddha said, sadhu, sadhu, sadhu. This is the beginning where you can start rectify yourself. So long as one remains under the delusion that I love so and so, I love so and so, I love so and so, one does not come out of the madness. When one starts realizing I love myself, oh look what a self-centered person I am. What a selfish person I am. Whom you say mine, my son, my wife, my husband, etc., etc., you are going to dream. You have certain assumptions.