If he is really fond of only his name, then what an ego-centered person he is. What a self-centered person. It is said that God created human beings in his own image, but I feel otherwise. Human beings created God in their own image, according to their own liking. We want such a God, and we keep on reciting his name, he gets puffed up, then whatever we do, right or wrong, we will get all the benefits, and he will give us this benefit or that benefit, this kind of God we create. Our own imagination, our own creation. For example, if there is a Goenka, mad Goenka, who is very fond of his name, every day people should talk about Goenka, Goenka, Goenka, on the radio Goenka, Goenka, on the TV Goenka, Goenka, on the newspaper Goenka, Goenka, and people build temples of Goenka, and establish statues of Goenka, and then start dancing, Harik Goenka, Harik Goenka, and this Goenka gets puffed up, wonderful, such a mad Goenka. When he creates an imaginary God, he will create a God of that type, who gets puffed up by hearing his name. What we have done, poor God, if he exists, poor God, we have so much devalued him. This is what happens when the devotion becomes blind devotion. You forget to get inspiration from the qualities, and you forget to inspire with this inspiration to develop those qualities in you, then devotion is harmful. Someone says, I am a great devotee of Jesus Christ, oh wonderful, such a saintly person, a prince among the saints, so saintly, whether someone is really saintly or not, the yard stick is at the time of death, what kind of mind this person is carrying, and what kind of mind he was carrying. He was tortured to death, crucified, being tortured, he has not a trace of anger or aversion or hatred towards those people who are torturing him, only love, only compassion. They don't know what they are doing, ignorant people, may they not be punished for their bad deeds, they are so ignorant, only love, only compassion, a real saintly person. If someone says that I am a devotee of Jesus Christ, and does not develop even a little bit of love and compassion and goodwill for others, then this devotion is blind devotion. Someone comes to me and says that I am a devotee of Jesus Christ because I accept that he was son of the God, so what, he was son of the God, as if he wants a testimonial from you, and then he will be very happy, well look, these people, they give me, so many people give me testimonial, I am son of the God, and what sort of Christ is Christ? We are mad, what we are doing? Is there any doubt that he was son of the God? He was son of the God, after all what is God? Truth is God, love is God, compassion is God, purity is God, and here is a product of truth, of love, of compassion, of goodwill, of purity, he is a product of that, he is son of God. Those qualities are important, and if we try to develop those very qualities in us, then yes, we are good devotees of Jesus Christ, otherwise no, it becomes a blind faith, blind devotion, does not work, does not work. Someone says I am a devotee of Buddha, ah wonderful to be a devotee of Buddha, have devotion towards Buddha, fully enlightened person, liberated person, but again, if the devotion becomes blind devotion, then early morning somebody with folded hands will say Buddhaṃ sarvaṃ gacchāmi, I take refuge in Buddha, I take refuge in Buddha, I take refuge in Buddha, three times, I have taken refuge in Buddha, now I am free for the whole day, to do whatever I like, I get open general license for doing anything, after all why I took refuge in Buddha, so that he can liberate me in spite of all my bad deeds, he should liberate me, otherwise why I take refuge in Buddha, madness, not understood, what does he mean, what does he mean when he asks people to take refuge in Buddha, quality, enlightenment, take refuge in enlightenment, and take refuge in enlightenment means develop enlightenment in you, your own enlightenment is going to give you refuge, no one else will give you protection, no one else, you have to take refuge in your enlightenment, develop that quality and then yes, there is a purpose in saying that I take refuge in Buddha, otherwise it becomes a blind devotion, blind devotion, he is not interested to establish a sect, he doesn't want more and more people to say I take refuge in Buddha and have a bigger sect, nothing doing, he is interested, full of compassion, to see people that they come out of their misery, they belong to this sect or that sect makes no difference, people of this community or that community makes no difference, of this country or that country makes no difference, this gender or that gender makes no difference, suffering is there, and enlightenment of Buddha is, he gives a path, because of his enlightenment he found out the path which made him enlightened and out of all the compassion he gives that path, if you don't walk on the path, the devotion is no devotion, it doesn't work, when we give respect to Buddha, he teaches us how to pay respect to Buddha, Buddha is not a name of any person, it's the quality, enlightened one, and anyone can be an enlightened person, not merely Gautama, this is not the monopoly of one person to become enlightened, he kept on saying that before me there were countless Buddhas, and after me there will be countless Buddhas, so when you pay respect to Buddha, he taught us how to pay respect to Buddha, all the Buddhas of the past, all the Buddhas of the future, all the Buddhas who are now present may be, I pay respect to all the Buddhas of the past, all the Buddhas of the future, to all the Buddhas of the past, of the future, of the present, then you don't get entangled yourself in a sect, in an organised religion, then you get inspiration from the enlightenment, the quality of enlightenment, and try to develop that enlightenment in you. Whenever you pay homage to Buddha, he explained us how to pay homage to Buddha, Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arhato Samma Sambuddhassa, Namo Tassa, I pay homage to anyone who has these qualities, Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arhato Samma Sambuddhassa, who is fully liberated, fully enlightened, and enlightened by his own efforts to such a person, I pay homage. You pay respect, we say you do puja, there is a puja which is called Samish Puja, impure puja, you have an image of Buddha and you offer incense and flowers and sweets and bow down and you say I am doing puja of Buddha, no, Niramish Puja, and what is Niramish Puja, pure puja, and he says Dhamma Nuddhamma Patipatya Buddham Pujemi, I do the puja of Buddha, that means I pay respect to Buddha, by walking on the path of Dhamma, from the grossest to the subtlest, you start with Sila, the grossest part of Dhamma, then you proceed to Samadhi, subtler than that, you proceed to Panya, subtler than that, and you transcend that also and experience Nibbana, the subtlest ultimate reality, this is how you pay respect to Buddha, Dhamma Nuddhamma Patipatya Buddham Pujemi, so teaching the Dhamma must be very well understood, having respect for somebody, having devotion towards somebody, one should not make it, one should not make it a blind devotion, otherwise it does not work, similarly having respect for Buddha, one must keep on remembering the quality of Buddha, what are the qualities of Buddha, and these are the qualities of Buddha, He is a Bhagavan, what Bhagavan, in 25 centuries India has lost the meaning of this word Bhagavan, now there are Bhagavans like monsoon frogs here and there, everywhere Bhagavan, everybody claims I am a Bhagavan, what Bhagavan, 25 centuries back, what was Bhagavan? One who has destroyed all the Raga, craving, all the aversion, dosha, and all the ignorance, illusion, delusion, moha, lives, lives in the glory of liberation, is a Bhagavan, so unless all these impurities are eradicated, to call oneself Bhagavan is wrong, and Buddha is a Bhagavan, you get inspiration to develop those qualities, little by little, you are coming out of Raga, you are coming out of dosha, you are coming out of moha, craving, aversion, ignorance, then you are really paying respect to Buddha, you have devotion towards Buddha, araham, again old language of India, ari means enemies, ham, one who has killed, killed all the enemies, oh an apostle of non-violence, how can he kill anybody, and yet he has killed all his enemies, and who are our enemies, no outsider, no outsider being is our enemy, our own impurities are our enemies, one who has killed all the impurities, not a trace of defilement in the mind has become an araham, has killed all the enemies, samma, sambuddho, he has become fully enlightened by his own efforts, everyone has to become fully enlightened by one's own efforts, one does not make effort and expect some supernatural power, some invisible power to make you enlightened, has not understood what Buddha is, samma, sambuddho, each has to work out one's own salvation, get one's own enlightenment by one's own efforts. One is perfect in vidya and perfect in acharan, that means in practice as well as the theory, one understands dharma at the highest level, vidya, the wisdom, and then applies it in the life, this is the quality of Buddha, yathavadi, tathakari, yathakari, tathavadi, whatever he speaks, he practices in life, whatever he practices, that much only he speaks, nothing more than that, and that is why he is called tathagata, one who has walked on the path of personal experience of the truth, truth, truth, has reached the ultimate goal of ultimate truth, if we say that we are devotees of Buddha, we have to follow that, step by step with the truth, with the truth, vidya, charanasampanno, sugato, every step taken by this person is the right step, at the physical level or vocal level or mental level he can't do anything that will harm others, we also try to develop that quality in us, every step of ours, every action of ours should go for the good of others, not to harm others, lokavidu. When he has realized the truth of the entire universe within the framework of the body, we also start taking steps to experience the truth of the entire universe within the framework of the body, whole life one who keeps on serving people, serving people, so much of compassion, he becomes enlightened at the age of 35 and passes away at the age of 80, 45 years, day and night serving people, serving people, suffering all around, people are so miserable, he finds out a wonderful technique, a wonderful path and out of compassion he keeps on serving, keeps on serving, day and night, hardly 2 to 3 hours he will sleep and that also just lying down with the awareness and with wisdom, rest of the time serving, serving, serving, whole life kept on serving people, now it is 80th year and 3 months before he passes away, he announces that after 3 months I will leave this body, where I should leave? At that time he was in the eastern part of India somewhere and he decides to go to Kushinagar, a big city in the middle of the northern part of India and he has reached there, now this full moon night, at the end of this full moon night he will breathe his last, he is lying under a tree, his attendant Ananda is there to serve him and suddenly a thought comes in the mind of Ananda, tomorrow morning as the day breaks, he will be no more and he has got thousands of people in this city who are his devotees, when they will come to know that he came so close to our city, this mad fellow Ananda didn't inform us, otherwise at least we would have seen him, paid respect while he was alive, so it is my duty, I must inform, he went to the city, just informed one or two and then the word spread like a wildfire everywhere, people started coming in large number, tomorrow morning he will not be there, so he must pay respect while he is alive, large number of people coming, Ananda doesn't know how to manage them, he requests them, please come in a queue, got more and more people, pay respect and go, pay respect and go, first part of the night over, middle part of the night over, now the last part of the night is getting over, in a few minutes he will breathe his last, still there is such a big gathering, somebody at the head of the queue, he doesn't move, he says no, you want me just to go and pay respect to him, that body, what I will gain? I want to go to him to learn this wonderful technique from him, I know he is fully enlightened, he knows the technique, I don't know what you people will teach after he passes away, you may teach properly or not teach properly, while he is alive, I want to learn the technique, Ananda says well look, in a few minutes he is going to breathe his last, this is not the time to teach you dhamma, Ananda says no, it's alright if you don't want to pay respect, leave the space for others, let them come, and he neither moves nor goes himself, and these words reaches the ears of Buddha. Somebody has come to the Ganges to take a handful of water to quench the thirst, and people tell him no, you can't quench your thirst, you can't take water, just pay respect to Ganges and go away. Ganges starts overflowing, the Ganges of compassion starts overflowing, Ananda, allow him to come, he needs dhamma, he is a proper person to be given dhamma, he needs it, send him, I will teach dhamma. While breathing his last he teaches dhamma, at least one person should get. Not a single moment should go waste, just serving people, serving people, without caring anything about his own discomfort, helping people, if we develop even little bit of such compassion, such love, such goodwill, such selfless service, then there is meaning in saying that we are devotees of Buddha, otherwise it is just, no purpose is served. Someone says that I take refuge in dhamma, I have got great devotion towards dhamma, the teaching of Buddha. What dhamma? Unless one understands what dhamma, and simply says I take refuge in dhamma, it doesn't work. Take refuge in dhamma, you live the life of dhamma, you develop dhamma in you, you develop sila, samadhi, panya in you, then the purpose of your saying that I take refuge in dhamma, otherwise it is purposeless, it is senseless. And what dhamma is? Dhamma is not a sect, dhamma is not an organized religion, dhamma is universal law, law of nature. If one has started living the life in line to the law of nature, then yes, one has taken refuge in dhamma. And he explains what are the qualities of dhamma. Six qualities of dhamma. One has to keep on understanding whether those qualities are there or not, otherwise in the name of dhamma, one may get entangled in some kind of sect, belief, dogma, etc. What are the qualities of pure dhamma? Swakkhato bhagavata dhammo. Swakkhato. It must be very clearly explained. No mysticism involved. No acrobatic intellectual exercises. Nothing doing, so simple. In so simple words it must be explained, so that ordinary person can understand it, because one has to follow it. Unless people understand. This is not the game of philosophers or scholars. This is something which people should understand and follow. That is why the first quality of dhamma, swakkhato, swakkhato. Sandityako. Then, whatever you are experiencing with your direct experience, the truth that you experience, then it is dhamma. The truth experienced by an enlightened person is not truth for you. The truth as explained in the scriptures is not truth for you. The truth experienced by your teacher is not truth for you. What you experience, sandityako, with your own eyes, with your own experience, direct experience, step by step, step by step. You may start with very gross truth, doesn't matter. This is your truth, your own experience, your own wisdom. And you keep on walking on the path with the truth, with the truth. You are bound to experience subtler, subtler, subtler. The entire field of mind and matter, you experience the truth of mind and matter. And then transcend and experience something which is beyond mind and matter. Swakkhato, bhagavata, dhammo, sandityako, akaliko, akaliko. To get the fruits of your practice of dhamma, should not take time. Not that you practice dhamma now and you will get benefit after death. You perform this rite, this ritual, this ceremony, and after that you will get this 7th heaven or 11th heaven, who has come from 7th heaven to tell me that I have performed these rites and that's why I am in this 7th heaven. All purposeless, what you gain now. Of course after death also you will get benefit. But what benefit you are getting now? If you are getting no benefit now, then it is no dhamma. You have taken steps on dhamma. You must get benefit of you having taken steps on dhamma. Then only it is pure dhamma, otherwise no dhamma. Somebody gives me a post-dated cheque. Post-dated cheque on a bank above the clouds, which does not exist. What am I to do with this post-dated cheque? One must get benefit. Akaliko. There should not be a gap between my action and the fruit that I get. Akaliko. A change must start in the life. If you really started taking steps on the path, a change must start here and now, in this very life. A change for better. Ehipassiko, another very important quality of dhamma. If someone has really started taking steps on dhamma, one has to judge, examine whether really it is dhamma or not. Ehipassiko, which literal meaning is come, come and see yourself. Come and examine yourself.