The seventh day is over. You have now three more days left to work, but to work seriously you have only two more days left, because tenth day after the sitting from 8 to 9, you will learn a new technique of meditation and after that the vow of silence is over. Noble silence, no more noble silence, it will be noble chattering then. Chattering is chattering, noble or not noble. Chattering and serious meditation cannot coexist, they can't go together, so you won't be able to meditate seriously on the tenth day and yet it is a very important day, very important day because for nine days very deep operation, very deep surgical operation of the mind. On the tenth day this deep wound will require some balm and the technique that you will learn on that day will be a very soothing balm on the wound and moreover coming out of a very deep operation, coming out of silence for nine days, suddenly one comes to the outside world, comes in contact at times. People have very shocking experience, so that tenth day is a shock absorber for you. On the eleventh day you can face the world better. So for actual very serious meditation the next two days and Buddha wants you to meditate continuously. So far as this technique is concerned continuity of practice is the secret of success. People come for longer courses, 20 days course, 30 days, 45 days, they work continuously. You have recess periods but there is no recess period for long term students. You also have to learn how to practice continuously, so for these two days learn how to practice continuously. During meditation periods of course you sit with closed eyes and meditate but what you call intervals are no more intervals for you now. When you have to do something at the physical level you have to get up and walk, walk to your residence, walk to the dining hall etc. You are still meditating with open eyes you are aware. You are just resting, open eyes you are aware. You are aware of whatever you are doing at the physical level. If you are walking you are aware, you are walking. If you are eating you are aware, you are eating. If you are bathing you are aware, you are bathing. You are resting you are aware, you are resting. But then along with that very essential you are also aware of some sensation or the other on the body. People have not understood Buddha properly and they made it just awareness of walking, walking, walking, eating. It has its own advantage but this is not Buddha's teaching. He wants you to be always aware of the sensation, either respiration or sensation. If you miss sensation then you miss the deepest part of your mind and you have to rectify the deepest part of the mind, you have to change the behavior pattern of the deepest part. So sensation, awareness of sensation is very important. While you are walking it is not necessary and at this stage not possible also that you can feel the whole body, sensation on the whole body, at least on the moving part. If you are walking you are aware of sensations on your legs. If you are eating you are aware of sensations on your fingertips, the mouth touches the food, you are aware of the sensation on the lips, on the gums, on the tongue and as you swallow on the throat, whichever are moving part, your sensations. Sometimes you don't feel sensation on the moving part than any part but somewhere on the body you must be feeling a sensation and along with that you are aware of whatever physical activity is going on, that is during recess periods. Then you have a continuity. Meditation hours you sit, close the eyes, meditate. Rest of the period you open and do whatever is necessary to be done at the physical level and you are still meditating because you are aware of your activities and you are aware of the sensations. Night time you go to bed, closed eyes, you are lying down. Lying down you are aware of every movement of your body, you feel like turning on one side and you are aware you are turning on the one side and then you turn on the other side. You are aware of everything that is happening at the physical level, along with that you are aware of sensations. Not necessary again to move from head to feet in order or feet to head in order. You are lying down, any sensation arises anywhere, you are aware. So some sensation or the other, anywhere on the body and as you are aware of sensation, aware of sensation, you get sleep, deep sleep, very good. Night is for deep sleep. Next day morning as you awaken, you feel sensations. Again you start with the sensations. Quite possible at times a serious student may not get a deep sleep. Half asleep, half awakened, very good and in some cases whole night no sleep, wonderful. Whole night no sleep but you keep lying down, closed eyes, no sleep, doesn't matter and you are aware of sensation, aware of sensation. If you start worrying, oh look no sleep, 12 o'clock no sleep, 1 o'clock no sleep, 2 o'clock no sleep, then next day you come up as a sick person. You are not practicing Vipassana but you are just aware of your sensation. If no sensation, aware of respiration, whole night and the mind is very equanimous. Next day you get up so fresh as if you have come out of very deep sleep, very deep sleep. After all nature wants you to sleep only for two purposes. One purpose is to give rest to the body. Whole day the body has been working, now give rest. Similarly whole day the mind was busy here, there, give rest to the mind. So night time never sit and meditate, keep lying. So you get full rest to the body. You give full rest to the body and mind gets wonderful rest when it is awakened, aware and at the same time equanimous. It gets so much rest. So the purpose is served, the body gets full rest, the mind gets full rest. Next day you are very fresh, very fresh. There are in all the Indian scriptures three kinds of situations are there. Either one is awakened or one is in sleep or one is in dream. But there is a fourth situation for the yogis. Yogis does not mean those who do this acrobatic exercises of asana and pranayama. They are not yogis. Yogi is one who attains communion with the ultimate truth, is a yogi, vipassana yogi. Now that is a stage which is very high stage. You are awakened not as a sick person. You are awakened with the reality of the sensation within you and keeping your mind perfectly equanimous, perfectly equanimous. That is why in many of the scriptures it is said the entire world sleeps but the yogi remains awakened, awakened in this sensations, the reality inside. This does not mean that night time you are getting sleep and you say I won't sleep, I am a vipassana yogi, let the world sleep, I will remain awakened. That is going to extreme. If naturally you feel like sleeping, sleep. But if you don't get sleep and you are aware of sensations, you are equanimous, no worry, don't have any anxiety. You are doing your job. You are just aware of the reality at the level of sensations and you are not reacting. You are equanimous. You have given full rest to the mind. You have given full rest to the body. Like this, make use of these remaining two days. Learn how to practice rattan devam atanditavas. Buddha says day and night, only when you are in deep sleep you can't help. Otherwise day and night, continuous, continuous, continuous, make a very deep surgical operation so that in these two days you take out very deep rooted complexes which are causes for great misery for you. Let them come out now. This is a wonderful time to get liberated from those complexes and continuity will help you. Storms might come still but now having covered seven days, you have strength to face. You are strong enough to face them, don't worry. No such storm will come which will make you very much agitated. Those five enemies, five nirvanas are still there but they are becoming weaker, weaker, weaker and you got five friends also, wonderful friends. Keep them with you and you will find that these friends are so helpful to you. These friends are really helpful provided their purity is maintained. When they lose their purity, these very friends become our enemies and they become very harmful. Who are our friends? What is their purity? Let us understand. Five friends we have. The first friend in the language of those days was called saddha, that means devotion, faith. Devotion, faith is a very important friend. One who does not have any faith, any devotion in whatever one is working, then how can one work? All the time doubtful, skeptical, then one cannot work. Must have confidence, must have faith. Now seven days are over, by this time one should have faith in the technique, on the path and can work much better. But this faith, this confidence, this devotion can become a very big enemy if it becomes blind. Blind faith, blind devotion, blind belief does not help us. They are big enemies. Don't allow them to become blind. All these five friends, if they become blind, they are useless, they don't help us in any way. So along with this, there must be wisdom. Every friend must have the wisdom with it, so that you understand the purity of this particular friend, the devotion. Purity of devotion is only when you have wisdom with devotion. Without wisdom it will become blind. The wisdom is like our eyes and devotion is like our legs. One who does not have eyes will walk on the path, may even run on the path, but will not know when he or she has taken wrong path. One may fall down in a ditch because no eyes. One has only eyes and no legs, no devotion. One will keep on looking the path, oh wonderful path, so wonderful, so great, Buddha's teaching is so wonderful, Dhamma is so wonderful, but you can't take one step on that because you have no devotion, you've got no feet. Both are important. The communion of these two, that gives us so much strength because then the devotion becomes enlightened devotion. A devotion with discriminatory intelligence, discriminatory wisdom, then you know what is the essence, essence of devotion. You don't take it just blindly. What is the essence of devotion? You may have devotion in anyone, in any God, Goddess, a saintly person, an enlightened person. Why you have devotion in this person, in this being? Because this person is a saintly person, he has certain qualities and the devotion is towards the qualities. You get inspiration seeing those qualities and then you get an inspiration to develop those very qualities in you. Then the devotion is very helpful, very helpful, very purposeful. Otherwise it doesn't help. If you just make devotion with a begging ball, you keep on asking Oh God Almighty, please give me this. Oh Goddess, please give me this. This desire must be fulfilled, that desire must be fulfilled. That kind of devotion is blind devotion. It does not help. Devotion for the qualities and getting inspiration and developing those very qualities is a wonderful devotion. An instance, again years back, during the early courses I gave in India, coming from Burma, a very old lady came to a course, took the course very seriously, worked very seriously, understood the technique properly, worked properly and got wonderful results. Going back home for one year she continued to practice morning and evening, continued to apply this technique in daily life and again she got much more benefits. After one year she came again to get established more and more in the technique in Dhamma. But she had an interview with me and then told me that she has got one fear in her mind. What fear? She says she comes from the Bhakti cult, the cult of devotion and this is Gyan Marg. Gyan Marg means the path of wisdom. Although this will take to the final goal, I understand. But I fear I don't want to get out of my Bhakti cult, my devotion. That must remain. And I fear by this technique I will miss my Bhakti, my devotion. And I tell her, oh no, don't worry, your Bhakti, your devotion will become stronger. Oh no, no sir, with this kind of technique there is no place for Bhakti, no place for devotion. And she won't understand. I told her, alright, do you really have faith in your God or your Goddess? Do you really have confidence? Do you really have devotion? She said, what sir? Traditionally we are in this cult of Bhakti, we have got so much of devotion, so much of faith, so much of confidence in this God or that Goddess. Then I questioned her, do you make promissory offerings? Back in India it's very common, promissory offering. What is a promissory offering? Say somebody is sick in the family, the head of the family, the mother or father will go to the temple, go down to that God or Goddess and then say, please cure my son or daughter, whoever. And when she or he is cured, I will offer you sweets, five rupees worth of sweets. Do you make such promissory offerings? Oh certainly, this is very common. Then you don't have faith in your God, you don't have faith in your Goddess. First you must cure your son or daughter, then only you offer five rupees, you don't have even five rupees worth of faith in your God or Goddess. You won't offer this five rupees worth of sweets earlier. First you must cure my son or daughter. A commercial bhakti, commercial devotion. You give first and then you take. Do you even take? This is no devotion, blind devotion, doesn't help. And this is what happens in the name of devotion, you always expect something, this God should do something for me, that Goddess should do something for me, this enlightened person must do something for me, this saintly person may do something for me, always expecting something, expecting something, is no purity of the bhakti. Someone says that he's a great bhakta, great devotee of Rama, wonderful. To be a devotee of Rama, a person of so much good qualities, you remember those qualities and try to imbibe those qualities in your life, it's a wonderful bhakti. But one does not do that. Rama, the quality of Rama, you might have heard his story, life story. He was the eldest son and father decided, because he had given a promise to the youngest wife, youngest queen, and the youngest queen wanted her son to become the heir to the throne, so however unwillingly he decided that Rama should go in the jungle, get banished for 14 years and the youngest son, Bharata, should get the throne. Very willingly, he leaves the kingdom very, very willingly, let my younger brother enjoy all the luxuries of the royal palace, I'll be quite happy, I'll be happy, happy in the jungle. And he goes, father dies, and the younger brother who was not present at that time came, and when he came to know of all this, he was shocked, he's the real heir to the throne, not I, and he goes all the way to the jungle and tells him, no sir, no brother, you must go back to the capital, you are the owner of this throne, owner of the crown, in your place I will stay in jungle. The father made a wrong decision, he didn't make the decision in wisdom, and the elder brother says, Rama says, oh no, no, this is the order of the father, you must enjoy all the luxuries of the royal life. Two brothers, throughout the human history, you've got no other example, where two brothers are fighting, quarreling, you must enjoy, you must enjoy all the royal luxury. Such a wonderful person, Rama, and one says that I'm a devotee of Rama. Two brothers, they claim they are great devotees of Rama, and both of them are fighting, quarreling, having civil suits and criminal suits, or what? When our property was divided, you got a few dollars more on you, and you got a few inches of land more, so we are quarreling, and yet they call, they are great devotees of Rama, great devotees of Rama. Poor Rama, if he's somewhere above the clouds, he'll be shedding tears, what kind of devotees I have? They don't want to take any inspiration from the qualities that I have, they don't want to live a life that I lived, and yet they call themselves devotees, my devotees. Madness, such kind of devotion does not help, does not help. And then Rama, he's taken as God Almighty, incarnation of God Almighty. See what we have made of poor God Almighty, we have devalued him, what a great devaluation. Somebody writes the name of Rama on the forehead, Rama on his arms, Rama on his chest, and wears the upper cloth printed Rama, Rama, Rama, Rama, so that the Rama should know that I am such a great devotee of Rama. As if Rama is very fond to hear his name, every now and then his name, his name, people should keep on reciting his name. If he's the creator of the world, he should have created people only reciting Rama, Rama, nothing else, because he's so fond of this word.