Come and experience yourself. People come to courses like this. Some on the fourth day, some on the fifth day, some on the sixth day. They start thinking, oh, it is so wonderful. My mother should do it. My father should do it. So-and-so should do it. And suddenly you realize, I am here to observe my respiration, my sensation. I will see about that later on. And again after some time you start thinking, oh, so-and-so, very miserable person. This person must certainly get it. This is ehi pasiko. This is the quality of dhamma. Because you are not playing an intellectual game. You are not playing a devotional or emotional game. You are actually experiencing something. Those who come to courses and say, the discourses were wonderful. What discourses were wonderful? The dhamma was wonderful. If you just make it an intellectual entertainment, then no, it doesn't work. Because people come here and meditate. Because they meditate, they can't resist. When ten days are over, one starts thinking, whomever one meets, oh, it is so wonderful. I have tasted. It is so good. It has helped me. You also go and try. You also go and try. This is the yardstick to measure whether one has certainly, surely tasted dhamma or not. If one has really tasted dhamma, one is bound to get some benefit. And when one gets benefit, one feels like sharing this benefit with others. If someone is a good writer, he feels like writing something so that more and more people know about it. People do not know that such a technique is prevailing, is being taught. If one is an auditor, he will keep on talking here and there. If one is comfortable money-wise, will try to spend more and more money so that more and more people come and get advantage of it. Not that you want to enlarge your sect, now this small sect, let there be Vipassana sect, a bigger Vipassana sect. No, nothing doing. More and more people are miserable. If they come in contact with dhamma, if they come in contact with this technique, they will come out of their misery. This love, this compassion. And then someone feels, well, when I went to a course, all the facilities were given to me because somebody has donated. Not only that. So many people selflessly were serving me, that's why I could meditate so peacefully, so comfortably. Oh, I must also give 10 days of my life. I must go and serve in one of the courses. And people come like this to give their service. More and more people can get benefit of it. It is good when somebody gives a dana, a donation, because more people can get advantage of the facility. But it is much better if somebody gives a donation of service. You see, it is the volition that counts. When you are giving money, you are giving money for the liberation of people to come out of their misery. You give money to feed somebody. You give money to get water for somebody or some medicine for somebody. They are all good. But when you give money for the teaching of dhamma, nothing like that. Your volition is that people come out of their misery, total misery. When you serve, when you give money, that moment when you decided to donate money was a good moment. Your volition was wonderful. When you actually gave money, your volition was wonderful. But when you serve for 10 days, for 10 days continuously you are serving, you are serving, you are serving. Every time you are there, you feel good of others, ah, look, so many people get dhamma. Look, so many people are coming out of their misery. Continuously for 10 days, you are developing this parmi, you are developing this volition, dhamma volition. It is wonderful. People who have been giving such service, they find it. With my own experience, I know how I found it. When one starts giving service, one's own meditation becomes stronger and stronger. When you give food to somebody, the nature helps you that you will not starve. Similarly, when you give dhamma to somebody, your dhamma in return will become stronger and stronger. You get more dhamma. So like this, people think of Ehipassiku, more and more. I serve more and more people, so that more and more people get dhamma, more and more people get dhamma. This is the quality, the yardstick whether one has really practiced dhamma or not. Oppaneiku. If it is pure dhamma, then every step that you take on the path takes you nearer and nearer to the final goal. Because the path is such, so clear, like a highway, an autobahn, no curves here and there. Not that you enter blindly and then come back. Nothing doing. Every step takes you to the final goal. And that is Oppaneiku. Aadime Kalyanakari, Madhyame Kalyanakari, Antame Kalyanakari. It is beneficial in the beginning, beneficial in the middle, beneficial in the end. You practice only Sheela and you find, you start getting benefits. You practice Samadhi, more benefits. You practice Panya, much more benefits. You reach the final goal. Countless benefits you get. Every step, every step that you take on the path gives result, good result. Not a single step, not a little effort that you make on the path of dhamma goes waste. Nothing goes waste. And in this way it is called Oppaneiku. Pachchattang Veditabbo Vinyuhiti. Pachchattang, direct experience by everyone. When we belong to this sect or that sect, this community or that community, it makes no difference. Dhamma is for all. Everyone can get benefit of dhamma by practicing oneself. It is not that first you get converted in this particular organized religion, then this particular organized religion will start helping you. Nothing doing. Then there is something wrong. Anybody, one may keep on calling oneself a Hindu, a Hindu, a Christian, a Christian, a Jew, a Jew, a Muslim, a Muslim, a Buddhist, a Buddhist, makes no difference. Human being is human being. Out of ignorance, one keeps on generating craving, aversion, ignorance, and because of that one remains so very much agitated, so very much miserable. The path is there to take out the misery by taking out the impurities of the mind. So anyone can practice and will get the same result. Pachchattang Veditabbo. It must be direct experience. If you play intellectual game, it doesn't work. The same teaching was there. The entire spectrum of the spirituality of India before Buddha, at the time of Buddha, and after Buddha remains the same. Come out of craving, come out of aversion, come out of illusion, delusion, nothing new. Nothing new, but still so much new, because that is all at the intellectual level. At the emotional level, here arose somebody who says at the actual level, how to come out of craving. Well, look, you observe your sensation, your craving starts because of a pleasant sensation. Come out of aversion. Look at your sensation. Observe it. If it is an unpleasant sensation, then only you start aversion. Really? At the practical level, somebody is teaching, and this is Pachchattang Veditabbo, at the level of Vedana, one has to understand the reality and come out of the misery, Vinyuhi. Any wise person can do this, can practice this. It is applicable to one and all. These are the qualities of Dhamma. Understanding these qualities, if one starts walking on the path, the benefit is bound to be there. Similarly, one says, I take refuge in Sangha. Not in any person. The quality of the person. Anybody who is walking on the right path, Su patipannu bhagavato saavakasanghu, Uju patipannu bhagavato saavakasanghu, Nyaya patipannu bhagavato saavakasanghu, Samichi patipannu bhagavato saavakasanghu. Anyone who is walking on the right path, the correct path, the path of truth, the path of wisdom, and walking on the path, walking on the path, one has reached the stage where one has become a saintly person. Four stages of liberation. Out of them, at least first stage one has reached. And then only one is called a real Sangha. Such a person, by seeing such a saintly person, one gets inspiration. And with this inspiration, one starts walking on the path. This is taking refuge in Sangha. The devotion is good devotion with the wisdom when one starts applying dhamma in life. One starts developing the qualities in life. This is saddha, the first important friend of ours. Second important friend, in the language of those days, it was called virya. Virya means effort. Again proper effort. If you don't know how to make effort, you make effort in the wrong way, and yet you don't get the result. Proper effort, what you have to do? There is a story back in our country, in India. In the city of Varanasi, a very ancient holy city of northern India, four friends, one moonlit night they decided we better have boating for the whole night. They took a boat and Varanasi is Varanasi. It is a city of hashish, bhang, lot of smoking of bhang and drinking of bhang, and they had all that. And then in that boat, they started rowing, rowing the whole night, rowing, perspiring, rowing, perspiring, daybreak. And they saw their boat has not moved even an inch. It is where it was, what's wrong? And then someone found out. The rope by which this boat was tied to the tree at the bank, nobody untied this rope. This rope of ignorance is there, and you keep on rowing, rowing, perspiring, perspiring, what you will get? You must know how to work, and then you work properly with wisdom, understanding what the path is, understanding what the technique is, yes, you will reach the final goal, otherwise all your efforts will go waste. And third important friend is sati, awareness, awareness. Now sati has got two meanings, this word. One meaning of the word sati, smriti, is memory. People take that meaning sometimes, memory, and you start remembering. Memory of the past is not the technique of liberation. Sati, another meaning of sati is awareness, and awareness is always of the present moment. You can't be aware of the past, you can have memory of that. You can't be aware of the future, you can just be thinking of that. But you can't be aware of it. Awareness should always be and can always be for the present moment, from moment to moment. Whatever you experience, you are aware of it. Whatever you experience, you are aware of it. Aware at the surface level, and aware at the depth level. When you work with the sensation, you are aware at the depth level, and as well as you are walking, you are aware of walking, you are aware of eating, but at the same time you are aware of your own sensations. If that is missing, then it won't take you to the final goal. You may be very well aware of your walking, walking, walking, you get a wonderful faculty to remain alert about all your activities, but it won't take you to the final goal of liberation, if you are missing sensation. I give example of a circus girl, she is walking on a tight rope, and so much aware of every step. If she is not aware, she may fall down, break one of her limbs, or she may even die. So every step she is so aware, so aware, but she cannot become an Arahant. She cannot become fully liberated, because the sensation, she doesn't know what sensation is, and she doesn't know how to remain equanimous with the sensation. Or a dancing girl on the stage, aware of every step, every action, and yet no sensation. That doesn't take us to the final goal. Sensation is the teaching of Buddha. When you work with the sensation, you are aware of the sensation, you understand its nature of Anicca, and with that understanding you maintain equanimity, then you are on the path of liberation, because this is how you change the habit pattern of your mind at the deepest level. Otherwise, you are working just with the surface level of the mind. So Sati must be proper Sati, with proper wisdom, understanding what the Sati is, and then accordingly you work with Sati, you reach the final goal. And then Samadhi, again Samadhi must be Samma Samadhi, right type of Samadhi. Understanding must be proper. What Samadhi is, mere concentration does not work. Kusal chittasya eka gata, the concentration must be of a pure mind. That means the base must be free from ignorance. If you have got an imaginary object, and with the help of this imaginary object you concentrate your mind, it is not Samma Samadhi. Or at the base of the mind you have got craving, you want something. By this Samadhi I will gain this, I will gain that, doesn't work. Or your aversion at the base, doesn't work. Free from craving, free from aversion, free from imagination. The object that you are experiencing from moment to moment, you are Sati. From moment to moment, from moment to moment, how long you continue to be aware of the reality from moment to moment, from moment to moment, this is your real Samadhi. And the fourth, fifth friend, Pannya, wisdom, Upekkha, equanimity, very important. Again if this Pannya, this wisdom is merely at the intellectual level, or merely whatever you heard or whatever you read, Srutmaya Pannya or Chintamaya Pannya, it doesn't work. It must be Bhavanamaya Pannya. That is the contribution of Buddha to the human world, Bhavanamaya Pannya. You have to experience the wisdom at the level of your sensations. Then it is real Pannya. Equanimity at the level of sensations is your direct experience and equanimity, wisdom that keeps you free from craving, free from aversion, at the deepest level of the mind. This is what you started doing here. This is what you have to practice in your life. The practice you are with the sensations and that you are not reacting with craving, you are not reacting with aversion, you keep on understanding this is Anicca, Anicca, and your mind becomes equanimous, then you find how this equanimity has started manifesting itself in your day to day life. It must manifest. If you have just accepted Anicca, if you have just accepted equanimity only at the intellectual level or devotional level, you can't expect it to manifest in your day to day life. Ups and downs in the life are bound to be there, vicissitudes are bound to be there. How to deal with equanimity to all the situations in our day to day life, then yes, the Pannya is real Pannya. Again a story in our country, a very rich person at the old age died, and according to the custom there, his two sons started living in a joint family. For some time they continued in joint family and later on some misunderstanding arose, they started quarreling and then they divided the whole property, the money, jewelry, land, everything divided half half. When everything was divided, somebody found out a small packet hidden somewhere, they took it out, what it is? And they found that it contained two rings, one was the ordinary silver ring, other was a ring studded with very valuable diamond. The elder brother developed some greed and he tried to explain the younger one, to me it looks this is not the earning of our father, this is most probably it is coming from generations and therefore it should go for generations, I being elder, I better keep it, so that it goes for generation. If you sell it and divide the money, you will lose it, so I better keep it, you better keep the silver one, the younger brother smiled, all right, be happy, you be happy with the diamond one, I will be happy with the silver one. And they started their life, ups and downs, ups and downs are coming, the elder brother with the diamond ring, when there is spring in the life, he gets so elated, so elated, and when spring goes away and there is winter or autumn, he becomes so depressed, so depressed, always losing the balance of the mind, with everything he faces in the world, loses the balance of the mind, loses the balance of the mind, tension, tension, hypertension, this tranquilizer, that tranquilizer, a super tranquilizer, a sleeping pill, a super sleeping pill, and then it came to the stage where electric shocks were given, this is the brother with the diamond ring. The other brother with the ordinary silver ring, he started thinking, my father kept very secure this valuable diamond ring, it is understandable, why this ordinary silver ring, there must be some meaning, some purpose for that, and he started examining it, and he found something was inscribed on it, and he read, what is inscribed, and it was inscribed on it, this will also change, oh, this will also change, this is the teaching of my father, this will also change, everything changes, and he had this ring on his little finger. Spring comes, he enjoys, he doesn't run away from that, he enjoys spring, and looking at this finger, yes, this will also change, this is not eternal, and when it passes away, he smiles, I knew this was going to change, it has changed, so what, I don't care, he doesn't lose the balance of the mind, when winter comes, again his ring, this will also change, he doesn't cry, he doesn't feel depressed, this will also change, law of nature is such, it has to change, ups and downs, ups and downs are bound to come in the life, vicissitudes are bound to come in the life, if you keep on understanding this will also change, this will also change, not necessary to look at the ring, the ring inside, the reality inside, we have got that inheritance from the Buddha, observe this reality inside, this will change, a very painful experience is there, oh, this will change, a very pleasant flow is there, oh, this will change, and this change is there, certainly you are experiencing, whatever the truth you are experiencing inside, the same truth gets manifested outside, this will change, this will change, and you maintain perfect equanimity of your mind, then this friend is a very good friend for you, all these 5 friends are wonderful friends, don't worry about the enemies, no enemy can harm you, you keep these 5 friends with you, and keep them pure, no pollution, with the wisdom, understanding, how to make use of these friends, and you will find step by step, step by step you are moving towards the final goal, these 2 days of serious meditation, are days of real serious meditation, see that you maintain the continuity, day and night, only when you are in deep sleep, otherwise day and night, nothing to do with other students, carry on your own, carry on your own, make very deep operation, surgical operation of the mind, take out very deep rooted complexes, and get liberated, as many complexes you take out, that much liberation is there, liberation from the miseries, life is full of misery, because the life is full of these defilements, mental defilements, come out of them, and enjoy real peace, real harmony, real happiness, may all of you enjoy real peace, real harmony, real happiness, real happiness. Shreem Brzee. Shreem Brzee. Shreem Brzee. Shreem Brzee. Take rest for about 5 minutes, and then again start working, take rest for about 5 minutes.