He started serving people because once one tastes dhamma, one cannot resist, one feels like giving it to others, more and more people. All this population, the people, my subject, they are like my own children. As I want my children to develop in dhamma and come out of their misery, I like the entire population of my country to take dhamma and come out of their misery. He started spreading with all the love, with all the compassion, giving a good example as to how he has changed, others should also change. And not only northern India, nearly whole of India started practicing. He trained teachers, large number of teachers, who went around every part of India and started teaching it. And then he thought why only India, misery is there around the world everywhere, so why not to the other countries? And he sent to different countries, from in the west up to Europe and the whole of Asia. He sent his, he called dhamma doodh, ambassadors of dhamma, to teach dhamma, to teach Vipassana. Fortunately, two of them, who were arhants, fully liberated, they were sent to Burma by the name of Sona and Uttara. And these people took the words of Buddha and the technique, both. And since then, from generation to generation, from generation to generation, this wonderful dhamma was maintained in its pristine purity. The words of Buddha were also maintained and also the technique was maintained in the pristine purity. It went to different other countries also, like Lanka, Sri Lanka, Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, etc. There also the words was maintained, but the technique got lost. But in Burma, they maintained the technique also. I am very fortunate that I was born in this land, land of dhamma, where dhamma is still there. And again, I feel myself very fortunate that I was born in a business family. Fortunate because if I had been not born in a business family, in a rich family, and if I had not earned a lot of money, then perhaps some part of the mind would have been thinking these rich people, they live a happy life and I am missing it. These rich people, now because I have passed through that game, and I know how miserable these people are, how miserable. This rat race of only making money, making money, nothing but money, money, money, makes them so miserable. I passed through that misery. I am fortunate that I passed through that misery. At a very young age, started this rat race of earning money, money, money, money, and earned a lot of money from the Burmese standard, was quite a rich man, quite successful in business and industry. And when somebody earns money, he gets a special position in the society. They make him treasurer or president or secretary of this religious organization, their social welfare organization, about a score of different organizations, president, secretary, president, secretary, director, trustee, another madness. It goes to the head. The ego gets inflated. Look, I am such an important person. And all that in a very young age, mid-twenties or so, and that made so madness. And this created so much tension inside. Again, I feel very fortunate that I passed through all that difficulties. I developed a kind of a very severe headache, migraine headache, a special kind of migraine headache, and there was no treatment. The best doctors in Burma, they tried to treat me, different kind of medicines, nothing could help. They started giving me morphine injection. Every fortnight, there will be very severe attack, and they have no treatment, they give morphine injection. It went on for about four, five years. And these very doctors, good doctors, they started saying me that slowly you will become morphia addict. Now, you take morphia for the sake of migraine, and later on, you will have to take morphia for the sake of morphia. Every day, you will have to take morphia. What kind of life will be if one has to take morphia every day? So they said, you keep running to foreign countries for your business, forget business. One trip you go, only to come out of morphia. We know, no doctors have got treatment for this migraine, special kind of migraine that you are suffering. But certainly, they will have some other painkiller. So why not try, accepting their advice, I went out, stayed long time in Switzerland, in Germany, in England, in America, and in Japan, where I had my own office, so still longer time. And the best doctors everywhere, spent so much of money, so much of time, again I find myself very fortunate, no doctor could treat me. The best doctors of the world, they could not treat me, they could not take me out of morphia even. Migraine is far away. Very fortunate. I came back, very disappointed, but ultimately it proved very fortunate. A friend of mine, who later on became Justice of the Supreme Court of Burma, very close friend. He said, Goenka, you have tried everywhere, why not try 10 days, 10 days with this teacher of Vipassana. Your disease looks like psychosomatic disease, and here is a technique given by Buddha, which will purify your mind, and once the mind gets purified, this psychosomatic disease goes away. Why don't try? I said, wonderful, if this can help. I went to my teacher, a very compassionate person, Sayaji Obakin, and I said, I want to join this, one of your 10 day course. He said, welcome. He knew that I am leader of the Hindu community, and this is a Buddhist path. He said, doesn't matter, don't get frightened. Anybody, Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Jain, all can get the same benefit. If you are a Hindu, you remain Hindu, I am not here to convert you, but you try this, it's a good technique. And then I said that I have come here because of this migraine disease. And then he suddenly said, no, I won't take you. I won't take you. Hey, what happened? You are devaluing Dhamma, he says. Dhamma is such a high spiritual path. It is to take you out of all the miseries of life after life, and you want to make use of just for your migraine headache. No, no, for that you go to some doctor, go to some hospital. This is not the place. And then very, very compassionately he explains me. If you practice this technique, this will purify your mind. The source of your misery is impurity in the mind. When that goes away, all psychosomatic diseases are like by-product. You will get the benefit. And then he explains me, you want to establish a sugar factory? For what purpose? To get sugar out of that factory, not molasses. Molasses will come as a by-product. Nobody starts a sugar factory to get molasses. This is just a by-product. So, you don't come here just for your migraine. You come here for high spiritual path. Then only it will help you. I understood because he was so kind and so compassionate, his vibrations were so wonderful. Yes, I will join, sir. And I will join only for spirituality, not for this migraine. If it is not cured, not cured, I don't care. But going back home, the conditioning of the mind from the very childhood, born in a very staunch conservative Hindu family, and although we are taught from our childhood to have respect towards Buddha, Buddha is taken as the reincarnation of the God Almighty, the creator, and he is the latest model of that God, 9th reincarnation, so you must have respect for him and all regards for him. But his teaching, oh no, no, no, his teaching is not good. Because he does not believe in soul. He does not believe in God. What kind of teaching? Atheist. Not good. This is what the training was of the mind, and that started worrying. If I go to these people and learn this technique, and if I become Buddhist, and if I have no faith in God, if I don't know faith in soul, what will become? I might go to hell. Oh no, no, no, this path is not for me. I better not go. For a few months, it went on. Some struggle went on. Then later on, I thought, my teacher says that you are a Hindu, you remain Hindu, I am not converting you to Buddhism. I make you a good human being, you practice Shila, morality, you practice mastery of your mind, you practice Panya, purification of mind, that is acceptable with you also. So why not try? All right, I try. But with a strong determination that I will remain Hindu, I won't become a Buddhist, all right. I give a trial for 10 days. And I went there, very fortunate. Of course, like anybody else, the second day, I thought like running away. Because the conditioning of the mind. Then I heard other people saying that when they meditate, they saw this light or that light, and I don't see any light. And my tradition says that if you see divine light, this is the stage of liberation. And look, these people are seeing divine light, and I'm not seeing divine light. And then I remembered the word of another saintly person, he says, a camel can pass through the eye of a needle, but a rich man cannot pass through the gateway of heaven. And I am a rich man. So this path is not for me. All these people, they are teachers, professors, doctors, good people, good hearted people. They can see all the divine light and all, I can't see. So why waste my time here? I better run away. And I pecked one of the co-meditators, professor of history of the university there. She was very kind. She found out that I have pecked and I want to run away. So she tells me, just one day, one day more. The first day you started getting so much sensation, people get only on the third day, you get so much and the teacher is so pleased with your performance, why you want to run away? And light is unimportant. Don't give importance even if you feel light. Just one day, I feel so grateful to her. She kept me. Otherwise, I would have missed this wonderful path forever. I stayed there. And that evening when I entered my small little cell to meditate, as I sat down, a light came. This light, that light, because the mind was not craving now. I am with my sensation. And suddenly a sound came. A divine sound. Oh, this is divine sound. This is divine smell. This is divine light. I said, no, my teacher says, don't give any importance. Only sensation. Only sensation. Very fortunate. I passed through all that. On the fifth day or sixth day, I was so fascinated by the whole teaching. Because as a leader of the Hindu community, I used to give lectures on Gita, I used to give lectures on Upanishad, on Vedanta, and everywhere the same teaching is there. Come out of craving. Come out of aversion. Come out of anger. Come out of this. Come out of that. But how to come out? There is no technique. Mere sermons, sermons, sermons. And here I find, this is applied Gita. This is applied Vedanta. Here you get the practice. Wonderful technique, which helps me to come out of my craving. I could not come out of my craving, my fear, my ego, my anger. And here is something, which gives a practical path, how to come out of it. I got so fascinated. And after ten days, I found, yes, some change has started coming in the life. Some change has started coming in the life. And I started making use of it. I feel very fortunate. Very fortunate that I was born in a country, Burma, which maintains this technique in its pristine purity, although with very few people. And they maintain the words of Buddha in the pristine purity. The technique of Buddha in pristine purity. And came in contact with this saintly person, with so much of compassion, he taught me Dhamma. For fourteen years, doing my, taking my responsibility as a householder, I kept on working on this technique also. After fourteen years, it so happened, my parents had left Burma and they had gone to India. And my mother became very sick. Some kind of psychic trouble she had. And I knew if she practices Vipassana, she will come out of it. But in those days, the Burmese government would not give a passport to their nationals to go out. I feel very grateful to the Burmese government. They gave me a passport to go out to India, to teach Vipassana to my mother. And I am very grateful to the India government. They gave me visa to stay longer and to teach technique to my mother. The first course was given within a month of my arrival in India. Sheila said that you cannot pay back the debt of gratitude of your parents. So difficult. Whole life you just keep on serving your parents, serving your parents, do nothing. Still you cannot come out of the debt. The only way to come out of the debt of the parents is, if the parents are not established in Sheila, help them to get established in Sheila. If they are established in Sheila, they have no Samadhi, help them to get established in Samadhi. If they are established in Sheila and Samadhi and no Panya, help them to get established in Panya. They have Sheila, Samadhi and Panya and they have not realized the ultimate goal of Nibbana, help them. I feel very fortunate that I could come out of the debt of gratitude of my parents. It was a small course, my two parents participated and twelve others participated, some known, some unknown. I had come to India just for three months to give this Thamma to my parents, especially my mother. And then these twelve people, when they passed through the course, they started pressing hard, one more course, please one more course, my father will participate, my wife or my husband or my son or my daughter, Ehi Paschiko, this is the quality of Thamma, come and see, come and see. So another course, and then another course, and then another course, don't know when that three month period passed away. And then month after month, year after year, and course after course, course after course, the Ganges of Thamma started flowing in the country of its origin. When I was in Burma, many people there had a belief and my teacher had a very strong belief. It seems when this wonderful Thamma was sent to Burma by Ashoka, these two Arhants who were sent there, liberated souls, when they were sent there, Sona and Uttara, their teacher told them that you are taking this jewel of Thamma to a country which will maintain it in its pristine purity for the coming centuries. It will be forgotten everywhere, but this technique will remain in that country. The name of the country in those days was Suvannabhumi, the land of gold, golden land. The golden land can keep this gem. After 2,500 years after passing away of Buddha, it will again come to India, get established there and then spread around the world. My teacher used to say now 2,500 years, and I don't know, maybe some accident. It was that year when I got my Thamma. 2,500 years was ending in the next, first year of the next Sāsana day, the revival of Thamma. That was the time when I got Thamma. He says now the clock of Vipassana has struck. It has to spread. It has to spread. To be true, at that time to me it looked like a sectarian belief. Why 2,500? Why not 2,400? Why not 2,600? Why 2,500? What is the reason behind it? It didn't look very scientific, but this was the belief. But when I came, I was really wonderstruck when I saw what is happening. When I came to India, I made a list of people who knew me or whom I knew. The list could not come to three figures. It was less than 100. Less than 100 in a country of millions, less than 100 people know me or I know them. How in the courses people started coming, unknown people. And from every sect, from every community, unbelievable. And not only ordinary people, householders, heads of the community, heads of the sect, the monks, Buddhist monks, the Hindu sannyasis, the Jain monks and nuns, thousands, hundreds, thousands. The Christian monks, priests, nuns, hundreds, thousands in all total. How they are coming? How they are coming? A large number of people from different walks of life, how they are coming? What miracle? I don't know them. They don't know me. How people get attracted to Dhamma? And then slowly it became clearer and clearer. People come to the courses. And when I come in contact with them, many of them, when I see them, meet them, discuss with them, talk with them, something starts inside, feeling that this person is known to me. Known to me from long time. This person is known to me. So many lives this person must have been meditating with me in Vipassana. Now the time has come. This person already has got seed of Vipassana, seed of Dhamma. And now the time has ripened for this person to grow, grow in Dhamma and not only help oneself but help others. There is a potentiality of this person not only to help oneself but help others also. And I also see there are people who have come just to take the seed of Dhamma. They have done some very good karma of the past, some very wholesome deed they have done. And the ripening of that deed has helped them to get a seed of Dhamma. So whether you belong to the category where you got the seed of Dhamma or whether you belong to the category where you already had a seed of Dhamma and now you have come to develop in Dhamma, the wonderful jewel that you have got, make use of it properly. Don't just throw it away. I have seen one big defect in some students and I keep on warning them. Many a time people come just to give a trial, nothing wrong. Something new, one should first give a trial. But you keep on giving trial, only trial and you never become serious to work. I see people coming to India and they will go for this particular experience or that particular experience, have grass experience or have some chemical experience. And then they go to some gurus, this baba experience, this guru experience. And similarly they come to go in Kay, go in Kay experience, go in Kay trip. We had all those trips, now we go in Kay trip. What you gain? All right, have a go in Kay trip. Have one, have two, have three, but ultimately make a decision. If you find that some other technique is good for you, work on that seriously and get benefit from it. Little bit here, little bit there, whole life you are wasting your life. It's a very serious path. It is not just a mental entertainment or intellectual entertainment or emotional entertainment. Like somebody is thirsty and wants water, started digging a well. You dig a well about 10 feet and then somebody says, no, no, no, their water is better. And you start digging there 10 feet, 10 feet here, 10 feet here, whole life you keep on digging 10 feet, 10 feet, you won't get water at all. So have one or two tries, doesn't matter. Then make a decision. I must go to the depth where I get my water. So make trials and then make a decision that if this path is suitable to you, you find that this looks very logical, pragmatic, scientific, is not any kind of gurudam is involved and no any kind of dogma is involved, no belief is involved, it's just pure science of mind and matter and it has helped me, it gives good result, then work on it, work on it. To me, I'm very sure it's a jewel, invaluable jewel, nothing like this one can get in life. Fortunately, you got it now. Make use of it, make use of it for your own good and make use of it for the good of so many others. Dhamma is a wonderful jewel. One can come out of all the miseries of the life, all the miseries of the life. All of you who have participated in this 10 day course, make use of this wonderful jewel and come out of your misery, all the miseries, enjoy real peace, real harmony, real happiness, real happiness. Namaste. Jai Gurudev. Namaste. 