regulate the breath, to control the breath. They have their own advantages. We are not here to condemn other techniques. But so far as this technique is concerned, the natural breath as it comes in, the entire path it uses the word yatha, bhruta, as it is. Not as you would like it to be, as it is. No created reality, no artificial reality, no imposed reality. The natural reality as it happens from moment to moment, as it manifests itself from moment to moment. You are now observing the breath, natural breath. If it is deep, you just accept the reality, it is deep. If it is shallow, you just accept the reality, it is shallow. Passing through the left nostril, passing through the left nostril, or right nostril, right nostril, both nostrils, both nostrils, if it is shallow, you don't try to make it deep, if it is deep, don't try to make it shallow, if it's passing through the left, don't try to turn it to the right. If it is right, don't turn it to the left. Just accept the reality as it is, as it is, as it is. Of course, sometimes for a very new student, when the breath is very subtle, one cannot feel whether the breath has come in or gone out. So, one is permitted to take a few, just a few slightly hard breathings, conscious breathings, intentional breathings, but that should not remain an object of concentration all the time, just a few, and then come back to natural, normal, soft breathing. If it is shallow, it is shallow, soft, it is soft. Develop your awareness of the softest breath, the shallowest breath, the finest breath, and that is how you are sharpening your mind. Another important thing, while you are feeling your breath coming in, going out, you have to keep your attention on a small area. The smaller the area, the sharper the mind is bound to become. If you choose a big area of the body somewhere, and keep your attention there and try to feel the breath coming in, going out, your attention will get concentrated, but your mind will not become that sharp to feel the subtlest sensation on the body. That is why he chose Nasagga, he said, the front part of the nostril. Keep your attention on this area, and from here you keep on observing the breath coming in, going out, coming in, going out, and this helps you that within three days you started feeling some sensation or the other. And this helped you to make your mind so sharp that by the time you were on the fourth day or the fifth day, you started feeling sensations everywhere. So area, very important. You have to start and you keep on working on a smaller area at the entrance of the nostrils. Natural breath, pure breath, bare breath, mere breath, nothing but breath. No verbalization. Understanding fully well that if you start verbalizing any word along with the breath, your concentration will become easier. No imagination, no visualization, understanding fully well that if you start having vision of a shape or a form of any god or goddess, any founder of religion, this religion or that religion, this saintly person, that saintly person, this enlightened person, that enlightened person in whom you have devotion. If you keep on imagining a shape or form, mind will get concentrated, but you will miss Vipassana. In Vipassana, all visualizations are prohibited, verbalizations are prohibited, imaginations are prohibited, natural truth that keeps on manifesting itself. That's all. One reason why we don't allow these words to be used, because most of the time, the words are nothing but the name of this particular god or that particular god, founder of this religion or that religion, and then it remains limited to a particular sect. A god who is very much respected by a particular sect, his or her name will not be recited by somebody else belonging to other sect, and dhamma has to be universal. Because our melody is universal, when the mind becomes impure, defiled, and one starts experiencing misery because of that, that is not limited to a particular sect or a particular community or particular country or particular gender. It is universal. So, the remedy has to be universal. No sectarian remedy can solve the problem. When you have these words, and if these are words belonging to a particular sect, then it can't be universal, universal practice. Or if you have a shape or a form, which belongs to this particular god or that particular god, goddess, or this religious person or that religious person, again, it gets connected with a particular sect. This is one reason. But there is another, subtler reason also. Sometimes a student comes to me. He says, I want to verbalize, because by verbalizing, it becomes easy for me to get concentrated. I won't use any sectarian word. I won't use the name of this god or that god. When the breath comes in, I will say one. When it goes out, I say two. This is universal. Anybody can say one, two, one, two, or coming in, going out, coming in, going out. Good. Argument is good. But still, we can't allow that. Why? Because any word, you keep on repeating that word, that word will become predominant for you, will become more important for you, you will forget all about the breath. Mind will get concentrated because of this word. You are repeating this word. Whether the breath is coming in or not, you will say in. Whether it is going out or not, you will say out. Out, in, out, in, out, in. You forget all about the breath. One, two, one, two, you forget all about the breath. Our purpose is not Our purpose is not just to concentrate the mind. Our purpose is to understand the reality pertaining to your own structure of mind and matter. How interaction is going on and you have to reach the stage where you start feeling the sensations. You keep on repeating one, two, one, two, in, out, in, out, mind gets concentrated. But you can't feel the sensations. You can't understand what is happening within you and you miss something very important. You miss Vipassana. Therefore, no verbalization. Another difficulty with verbalization is that every word that you repeat and as you keep on repeating it again and again, every word has its own vibration. And then masters of mantra, they found out that certain words have very strong vibrations. Like you strike a gong and very strong vibration comes. Words like om, ing, ring, cling, bija mantras, they said. These words, if you keep on repeating, keep on repeating, they generate very strong vibration in you. You get concentrated very easily. Your entire being gets engulfed in that particular vibration. But understand this is a created vibration. This is an artificial vibration. You are missing the natural vibration. And Vipassana wants you to experience the natural vibration. These created vibrations are good. Good to the extent that they won't allow any bad vibration. They work like a shield for you. But they are very harmful also. Because they become a big barrier. They won't allow you to feel your own vibration at the depth of your mind. What happens when you generate anger? What happens when you generate passion? When you generate fear? When you generate ego? That is much more important for you because you have to come out of that impurity. And if you keep on repeating and you generate a particular vibration which is artificial, created vibration, and you imposed it, then you have missed the reality at a deeper level. Therefore, no verbalization. No verbalization. Similarly, no visualization. The whole technique will take you from the apparent truth. Apparent, solidified, intensified truth. Say this body. Solidified body. And you keep on working in Vipassana, it turns into mass of vibrations, mass of atoms. This is the ultimate truth of the solidified body. And you now start an imaginary image, a solidified image. And then unless you have broken it, dissolved it to vibration, your purpose is not served. So, why create something and then dissolve it? Create something and already you have got so much solidity and to dissolve it is so difficult. Therefore, no imagination, no visualization is recommended. Just the sensation that you experience from moment to moment, yatha bhuta, as it happens. Not yatha katha, not yatha krita, not created by you. But natural vibration, natural sensation that you experience. This takes you to Panna. Then the whole body you start experiencing. And you are to observe the sensation, understand its nature, the nature of arising, passing, arising, passing. If you don't understand this nature of every vibration arising and passing, then there is every danger that the sensation will result either in craving or in aversion. And this keeps on happening throughout the life, life after life, sensations are always there. And the depth of your mind, the so-called unconscious mind, keeps on feeling these sensations all the time. It is either pleasant or unpleasant. When it is pleasant, this part of the mind keeps on reacting with craving, craving, craving. When it is unpleasant, this part of the mind keeps on reacting with aversion, aversion, aversion. This part of the mind, which is the root of the mind, has become a prisoner of its own habit pattern. All the time, day and night, either craving or hating, craving or hating, craving or hating. And that keeps on coming on the surface also. The mind at the surface also is influenced by the root. And you try to rectify your mind at the surface level, you may be successful for some time, but if the root is unhealthy, your entire mass of the mind will remain unhealthy. This was the discovery of Buddha. There were many teachers before Buddha, at the time of Buddha, and after Buddha. India is a very ancient land and highly spiritual land, where many experiments are done for the purification of mind, for the liberation of beings. But we find all the teachers before Buddha, contemporary to Buddha, and after Buddha, they all speak in the same language, you must come out of craving, you must come out of aversion, you must come out of ignorance, then only you will be liberated. Now craving, what craving? Aversion, what aversion? These six sense doors and their respective objects. You have to be free from craving towards any object. Some shape or form or color or light is the object of your eyes. You like it, you develop craving. You dislike it, you develop aversion. A sound is the object of your ear. A sound, you like it, craving. You dislike it, aversion. Like this, the smell for the nose, taste for the tongue, touch for the body, and any thought or emotion for the mind. These six objects, every spiritual teacher has said, don't get indulged in these sensual objects, otherwise you can never get liberated. Come out of this. Buddha also said the same thing. But Buddha went one step deeper, which nobody else could do. He found out, because he worked not with any kind of belief or philosophy of the past, all the beliefs he left aside, without condemning them, he left them aside. Like a scientist, he started investigating the truth pertaining to the mind, pertaining to the matter, where the misery really starts. And observing the truth, observing the truth, he reached the stage, Sankhyatena Pancha Upadana Khanda Dukha. Sankhyatena, at a very deep level. And in short, he could find out these five khandas, five aggregates, the aggregate of matter, the entire physical structure, mass of kalapas, arising, passing, arising, passing, and four aggregates of mind, the cognising part, the recognising part, the feeling part, the reacting part, all these five joined together, they give a ignorant feeling, I, I, I am this physical structure, I am cognising, this is my cognition, I am recognising, this is my recognition, I am feeling, this is my feeling, I am reacting, this is my reaction, this I mind, this is Upadana, tremendous amount of attachment to these five aggregates. And because of this tremendous amount of attachment, these five aggregates keep on arising, multiplying, multiplying, the Sankharas keep on multiplying, your misery keeps on multiplying, he could understand that at the experiential level, this is where the trouble starts. So he examined the entire structure of mind and matter at that level, where all these five he could see separately how they are working, and Vipassana takes you to that stage. If you start playing games with any kind of special sensation, this or that, then you will forget dividing it, dissecting it, understanding its nature, how the mind and matter get interaction, how they are influencing one another, how they get influenced by the one another, all that will become unimportant for you, and you will be just elated when you get a pleasant sensation, and you will get very much depressed when you have unpleasant sensation. He took us to Vedana, to the sensation, not to play the games of sensation. The aim was to come out of these sensual objects and not to generate craving and aversion, which was the teaching of all the spiritual leaders. But they were working only at that level, at the surface level, at the apparent level, don't get indulged in this sensual object or that sensual object. Buddha went deeper. He says our craving and our aversion does not arise to these external objects. The external object and your craving and your aversion, there is something missing in between, and that missing link is the sensation on the body. Any object, when it comes in contact, it comes in contact and there is a sensation, and one part of the mind gives evaluation, very good, very bad, it becomes pleasant, it becomes unpleasant, then only Vedana, then only the craving or aversion starts, not before that. And if this particular link is missing, then you keep on working at the surface level. It is good you come out of craving and aversion at the surface level of your mind. The intellect part of your mind becomes purified, nothing wrong, but then you miss the depth of your mind. He took people to go to the depth of the mind and work with the sensation. That is why those who want to practice Vipassana, as Buddha taught us, those who want to practice in the same way as Vipassana wants us to practice, they cannot forget the Vedana, the sensation on the body. If you forget sensation on the body and you are aware of everything else outside, it is good. It is good just to keep your mind concentrated, to keep the purity of your mind at the surface level, but you will miss the root level of your mind. With sensation, you are purifying your mind at the root level. So keep that in mind whenever you practice Vipassana. This sensation plays such an important part. The sensation, whether pleasant or unpleasant, you keep on understanding its nature. And with practice and with experience, however unpleasant the sensation may be, sooner or later you understand, well look, it arose and after some time it passed away. It is not eternal. And when it turns into very subtle vibration, then also this wavelet arising, passing, arising, passing. Oh, this is impermanent. This is the nature of every sensation because this is the nature of the entire physical structure. This is the nature of the entire mental structure. And a sensation is nothing but a product of the contact of these two. So when that arises as the object of the sensation, the mind and the body, they keep arising and passing away. So the sensation arises, passes away and you are experiencing it. You are not playing an intellectual game. You are not just accepting it because Buddha said so. And as you keep on experiencing it, experiencing it becomes Bhavanamaya Panya. You are living now. You are experiencing it. It is not just Suttamaya Panya. It is not just a theory for you. At the practical level, you are understanding and you started changing the habit pattern of your mind at the depth level. If this is understood and kept in mind, not that all the time you will be so perfect that whenever sensation comes, you won't react at all. That's a very high stage. But ultimately, one has to reach that stage. The aim should be very clear. Any sensation, I will not react with craving or with aversion. Even if I have reacted, I will come to senses as quickly as possible. A very pleasant sensation came and you started reacting, how wonderful. This is very good. I got a flow. Now I got a flow. Immediately, you must come to senses. Oh, after all, this is impermanent. What craving about it? And suddenly, it changes into very unpleasant sensation and you react with aversion. How quickly you come back to the wisdom? Oh, no, this also is impermanent. No aversion, no aversion. Like this, you learn yourself to get established in this Anicca, the wisdom of Anicca and you are progressing. You are progressing. These are the basic fundamental principles of Vipassana. If you don't miss them, certainly the results, the whole technique is result-oriented. Not that you will get benefit after death. After death, certainly benefits will come, there is no doubt, because there is a flow coming from the past and moving towards the future, taking us to the final goal, where the flow stops. But meanwhile, when the flow is there, benefits, benefits continue to be benefits, provided you practice in a proper way. This benefit must come here and now in this very life. If it is not coming, there is something wrong. If there is no change for better in your life, then there is something wrong. Something wrong means you are not practicing properly. The technique is helpful. It has been helpful last 25 centuries to so many people. It is helping now. So, there is no doubt about the technique, but the way in which one is practicing something may be wrong. So, contact your teacher, your assistant teacher, your guide and try to understand what is wrong, why I am not getting any benefit from it, why my anger has not diminished, my passion has not diminished, my ego has not diminished, my impurities are not diminishing and there is something wrong somewhere. Keep on examining yourself. Don't expect magic or miracle that having one 10-day course, now you are free from craving, free from aversion. It doesn't happen. If it happens, I congratulate, very good, but it takes time. It's a long path, quite a long path. If you understand how you have to walk on the path and if you are walking in the right direction, in the right way, the results, good results are bound to come, bound to come. I feel myself very fortunate, very fortunate that I came in contact with Dhamma, this path. Very fortunate that I was born in Burma, the land of Dhamma. India lost this technique. After Buddha for about five centuries, this technique helped the people of India so much, but then slowly, some vested interest because of some ignorance, people started polluting the technique. Try to mix this, try to mix that and when you start mixing up the technique, you make it polluted, then it loses its efficacy. You don't get the result which you should get and when people don't get the result, they stop practicing. So like that, India lost this technique. It went to different countries and there also it got lost, but one neighboring country, Burma, fortunately maintained the technique in its pristine purity, although with few people, not that every generation, all the masses of the population were practicing it. No, from teacher to pupil, from teacher to pupil, they took it their responsibility that we got it from India, we got it from Buddha and we have to maintain in its pristine purity because after 2,500 years, again it has to spread. This was the belief going on there. So they kept it in its pristine purity for their benefit and for the future generations. I feel myself very fortunate that I was born there and came in contact with this technique. 300 years after Buddha, during the time of Buddha and during 300 years after Buddha, this technique spread in northern parts of India. Then after 300 years, there came an emperor, a king, an emperor by the name of Ashoka and a very cruel person, very ambitious person, wanted more and more of his empire, to spread his empire. He don't mind killing people, maiming people, harming people, just out of this greed to have bigger empire and he was feeling very proud to call himself Chand Ashoka, Ashoka the cruel. He was very happy to say that, people getting frightened by his name. How this person, because of some good paramis of the past, he came in contact with Dhamma and he got totally changed. By practicing Dhamma, he realized, harming people and getting more and more wealth and more and more power, how is that going to help me? I'm harming myself, I'm harming so many people. He became totally changed and then people started calling him Dhamma Ashoka, one who was Chanda Ashoka, Ashoka the cruel, now become Dhamma Ashoka, Ashoka the master of Dhamma, who was now developed in Dhamma, full of love, full of compassion.