The 10th day is over and tomorrow morning by 7.30 or 8 we will come to the conclusion of this 10 day Dhamma Seminar. So this evening let us review what you practice during these 10 days, what you have practiced so that any aspect of the technique if it is not clear it will become clear, if it is clear it will become clearer, so let us review what you did. Of course the technique is very deep, in 10 days you have taken just a few step on the path and the path is very long path, we won't discuss the deeper aspects of the technique because according to the tradition the theory and the practice should go together, as much as you practice that much theory you must understand, as much theory you understand that much you practice, so whatever you practice for 10 days let us review what you did. Coming to the course, first thing that you did was that you took refuge in triple gem, triple gem that means gem in Buddha, gem in Dhamma, gem in Sangha and gem means very valuable qualities, the quality of Buddha, not in the person of Buddha, quality of Buddha, quality of Dhamma, quality of Sangha. This tradition of taking refuge in triple gem has unfortunately turned into converting people from one organized religion to another organized religion, Buddha was not interested in this, anybody who becomes really liberated, really enlightened has nothing to do with these conversions, what will anybody get by converting people from one religion to another religion, say if whole of this country or whole the world start calling themselves Buddhist and they don't practice Shila, Samadhi or Panna, what will they gain by this name? People don't call themselves Buddhist and they practice Shila, Samadhi and Panna, their life will become better, they will live a happier life, more harmonious life, good for them, good for others, their life will be worth living. So Dhamma is to live a proper life, it has nothing to do with those organized religions, quality of Buddha, quality of Dhamma, quality of Sangha and out of all these three, Dhamma is of utmost importance, therefore he kept on saying you have to take refuge in Dhamma, Dhamma Saranam, you have to make an island of Dhamma for refuge, Dhamma Deepa, and what Dhamma? Not the Dhamma which is in the scriptures, no, not the Dhamma that you hear from your teacher or you hear from Buddha, enlightened person, not that Dhamma. The Dhamma that you practice yourself, that is Dhamma for you, and this gives you all the protection, all the refuge. So he kept on saying, Atta Saranam, take refuge in yourself, Atta Deepa, make an island of yourself, develop Dhamma within yourself and this Dhamma which you have developed within yourself will be your real refuge, none else. He was not interested in establishing a sect, but unfortunately in his name not one but many sects got established and the purity of Dhamma got lost. Dhamma remains pure only when it remains universal. The moment it becomes sectarian, it loses its essence. An enlightened person is not interested in sectarianism, universal law of nature, this is what he discovers, and this is what he explains to people, and this is what he advises people how to apply it in life, that is Dhamma. Not rites, rituals or ceremonies of this particular religion or that particular religion, a philosophical belief of this particular religion or that particular religion, nothing doing. This is law, universal law, law of nature, which is applicable to one and all, one may keep on calling oneself a Buddhist or a Christian or a Hindu or a Muslim or a Jew, makes no difference. The law of nature is law of nature. When you break the law of nature, you are punished, then and there. If you live in line with the law of nature, you are rewarded, then and there, you live a very happy life, and this applies to everyone. This is what a Buddha discovers, the law is there, Buddha or no Buddha. Even before Buddha, this law was there. Somebody breaks the law, somebody generates anger, hatred, ill will, animosity, passion, fear, ego, defiles the mind, nature starts punishing, then and there. This was there even before Buddha. This was there at the time of Buddha. This is there after Buddha, it will continue to be there, and that is why he said, e sa dhammo sanantano. This is sanatana, that means eternal, this is always there, a Buddha or no Buddha. The one who comes out of these defilements, nature starts rewarding, one starts living a liberated life, a happy life, harmonious life, good for oneself, good for others. This was so even before Buddha. This was so at the time of Buddha. This is so even after Buddha, makes no difference. A Buddha discovers this law and applies it in his own life and becomes liberated, and then out of compassion starts distributing to others, distributing to others. It always remains universal, it has to remain universal, otherwise it will lose its efficacy. A Buddha is not interested in sect. Many a times you find him talking to people, he says, I am not interested in making you my disciple. I am not interested. I am not interested in breaking you from your old gurus. I am not interested in that. You have got certain aims of your life. If one has become a recluse, a monk or a nun, or even a householder, has some aim of the life, to get liberated from the impurities of the mind. I am here to help you in that. I have got a technique which I will teach you and practicing which you can come out of the factors and bondages of these impurities. That's all. I am only interested in that. So very much detached. At the time when he was passing away, he says, I am not depending on the Sangha. I am not depending on these people, the congregation of the monks, the saintly people. I am not, I am not depending on them. And they are not depending on me. Each individual is depending on oneself, is depending on Dhamma. There is no sectarianism involved. Dhamma is universal and Dhamma is involved. This is what you practiced here. A Buddha is Buddha only when he is fully established in Dhamma. If there is no Dhamma, this person will keep on calling oneself, I am a Buddha, I am a Buddha. Not Buddha. Nothing to do with Buddha. A Sangha is Sangha. A saintly person is a saintly person if he is established in Dhamma. Otherwise, he is not a Sangha. This has to be remembered very well. That when we take refuge in Triple Gem, we take refuge actually in Dhamma and try to develop Dhamma within ourselves, understanding fully well, the Dhamma that I develop within myself, this Dhamma alone can give me all the security, can give me all the refuge, can give me all the protection, will help me. Nothing else can help me. This understanding is there. And with this understanding, one takes refuge in Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha, the gem in them, the quality in them, but at the same time, one point should be very clear. Anyone who is walking on the path of Dhamma, that means purification of the mind. There are many yardsticks to measure whether this person is really progressing on the path of Dhamma or not. One yardstick. Two qualities start developing in this person. Very essential. If these two qualities are not developing, then understand this fellow is only playing some intellectual game or emotional game or devotional game. He has nothing to do with Dhamma. He is not practicing Dhamma. What two qualities? One quality, a feeling to serve others without expecting anything in return. Out of question to expect any kind of material gain, totally out of question, but even to expect some name or some fame or some position, some power, some status, oh no, then one has not understood Dhamma. Just to give, just to share what one has experienced, one has got so much benefit from Dhamma, one feels like serving others, serving others, distributing it to others. Is this quality coming or not? If this quality is not developing, then there is something wrong. This person is still self-centered. Even he talks of liberation, she talks of liberation, one's own liberation. What I have got to do with others? Then the purification has not started. Still ego-centered life, self-centered life. The ego when it starts dissolving, dissolving, one starts feeling about others. How can I help others? How more and more people can get Dhamma? This is one quality, to serve people in Dhamma without expecting anything in return. Second quality, to develop a feeling of gratitude, very important. Even if one gets a small little material thing from somebody, a feeling of gratitude should arise to get Dhamma. Although you are not taking refuge in Buddha as a person, but you get Dhamma from Buddha. A Dhamma which gave you the path for liberation, which has benefited you, and you don't have even a trace of a feeling of gratitude towards the person of Buddha, then no, you are not developing. To become Buddha is not easy. Countless life one keeps on developing parmi, these ten parmis which we discussed yesterday, in big quantity, to become fully enlightened in very big quantity, and it takes so many lives. But one keeps on doing that not just for one's own liberation, that one could have done by developing these very ten parmis in smaller quantity and one could have become fully liberated. But to reach the stage of sammasambuddha, fully enlightened, able to serve others, one has to develop these very ten qualities in big quantity. And for that, life after life, life after life, the feeling of compassion was there always, even before he became fully enlightened, that compassion was there, I will develop in Dhamma for the good of others, of course I will be liberated no doubt, but also for the good of others, for the good of others. If he had not worked so hard, he would not have become a sammasambuddha. And even if he had become sammasambuddha, if he had not distributed Dhamma, how could he could have gone? He would not have gone. If he had decided, well I became fully liberated now, what's the use of running after these worldly people, they won't understand Dhamma, I better go and live in a cave somewhere in the Himalayas, rest of my life and enjoy peace, nirvanic peace within myself, why take all the trouble of running after these people, then he would not have been buddha. Compassion, for the 45 years, after the age of 35 when he became fully enlightened, till the ripened age of 80 when he passed away, all 45 years, day and night, serving people, serving people, and whomever he trained, and then he sends those trained people, go out, distribute Dhamma, for the good of others, for the happiness of others, for the good of others, without expecting anything in return, just out of compassion, serve people in Dhamma, serve people in Dhamma, and like this he started spreading. And then from teacher to pupil, from teacher to pupil, generation to generation, how this was maintained in its pristine purity for 25 centuries, it is not easy. So all those people, the teachers, the line of teachers, who maintained the purity of the technique, one feels a feeling of gratitude towards them, a feeling of gratitude towards Buddha, a feeling of gratitude to this line of teachers, who maintained it in its pristine purity, very difficult. People try to get it polluted, just to satisfy the disciples. A disciple wants it in this way, alright, just to please the disciple. I come from business community, so I know very well, to satisfy the clients. Clients are always right. The customer is always right. Customer wants this way, alright, this way, wants this way, this way. Then one is not a Dhamma teacher. Quantity has no meaning, quality is important. Even few people practice, but they should practice in the proper way, not just to please people, to help people, bahujana hitaya, bahujana sukhaya, all this line of teachers, how they maintained it in its pristine purity, one feels very much grateful to them. So this quality of having developed gratefulness towards Buddha is there, although it is not taking refuge in the person of Buddha, thinking that he will liberate, because I have taken refuge in Buddha now, I can do whatever I like and Buddha will liberate me. Nothing doing, this is not Dhamma, it's against Dhamma. You have to liberate yourself. Buddha only can point out the path, he has pointed out, he has taught the technique, technique is there, people have maintained it in its pristine purity, one has to work on it, develop in Dhamma and get liberated. But the feeling of gratitude is important. That is why this taking refuge in Triple Gem. And the next, you took five precepts. Understand all these five precepts, they are parts and parcels of this technique of meditation. There are many techniques. Even 25 centuries back, at the time of Buddha, there were so many techniques of meditation. There were so many teachers. Six of them were very renowned teachers of those days. Out of those six renowned teachers, only one, besides Buddha, used to give importance to Shila, morality. But all the rest, just to please their customers, you can do whatever you like, you are free. You are free to break Shila, if you feel like breaking Shila. You want to have the sensual pleasure, go ahead, go do that. You want this pleasure, go ahead, do that. This kind of madness was there. And yet, each one of them announced that, I am a Buddha, I am fully liberated, I am fully enlightened. How soon, people forgot about them. In their lifetime, of course, they became very popular. For some time, they remained popular. People thought it is very easy, you can break your Shila and do whatever you like, and yet you can become liberated. Wonderful, this path is good. But ultimately, it's polluted Dhamma. It can't give you the real benefit of Dhamma. So even in those days, even today, there might be teachers who might tell you, Shila is not important. But so far as the purity of Dhamma is concerned, Shila is utmost importance. Those who keep on breaking Shila, and think that they will develop in Dhamma, impossible. Doesn't matter, the progress may be slow, but your Shila must be perfect, must be perfect. This foundation should not become weak. This is not because a Buddha says so. It is not because a scripture says so. After all, what the technique is? The technique is to purify the mind at the deepest level, at the root level. And whenever you break any of these five Shilas, you have to develop, you have to generate tremendous amount of impurity in your mind. When you kill, you have to develop anger, hatred, negativity, then only you kill. When you steal, you have to develop greed, craving, then only you steal. When you have sexual misconduct, then you have to generate a lot of passion, then only you can have sexual misconduct. Like that, every Shila, when you break a Shila, you have to generate a lot of impurity in the mind, and here you have come to practice to purify the mind. And you keep on breaking this purity of the mind, you keep on defiling the mind, how can you progress on the path? Without Shila, you can't take even the next step of Samadhi. Ordinary Samadhi, people can get it. But Samma Samadhi, right type of Samadhi, which will take you to Panya, which will take you to liberation, is not possible when one keeps on breaking the Shila. One has to maintain Shila, and to maintain Shila, one must develop the mastery over the mind in a proper way. Now whether one must first practice to develop the mastery over the mind, or whether one should first practice maintenance of Shila, it has become very difficult to put the horse before the cart, or the cart before the horse, very difficult to find solution. Such courses started, even at the time of Buddha. Come to a course like this, and because of the environment, and because of heavy program from morning 4, 4.30 till night 9, 9.30, you have no opportunity to break your Shila. How will you break Shila? You are kept so busy. So you are maintaining your Shila, at the same time you are practicing Samadhi, and your Samadhi is becoming Samma Samadhi, right type of Samadhi. A Samadhi with the base of illusion, delusion, imagination, can be practiced without Shila. A Samadhi with the base of verbalization, visualization, with the base of craving, with the base of aversion, can be practiced without Shila. But this kind of Samadhi, which wants the object, object of reality, reality pertaining to yourself, without craving, without aversion, if you want to develop this Samadhi, Shila is absolutely essential. So these kinds of camps, they help you, Shila for good Samadhi, good Samadhi for Panya. Samadhi was there, as I said, there were teachers in India, at the time of Buddha, even before Buddha, who were teaching Shila. Shila was not something new which Buddha started teaching. Similarly Samadhi was there, it was not something new that Buddha started teaching. He himself, before he became Buddha, he went to two other teachers where he learned very deep Samadhi, seventh Jhana and the eighth Jhana, seventh absorption Samadhi and the eighth absorption Samadhi, which today India and the world has lost totally. He got all that, and yet, it was not the right type. All the impurities of the mind could not be eradicated by that Samadhi, so he had to develop work, Panya. Now Panya was also there in India, even before Buddha, even at the time of Buddha, and even after Buddha. But the Panya was all the time Sutta Maya Panya. You read, you discuss, you talk, or Chintan Maya Panya, or you just intellectualize it, but Bhavana Maya Panya was missing. How to apply Panya in life, how to live the life of Panya, the living Panya, that was missing. This was the contribution of Buddha. The Samadhi was made very pure, and that became a contribution of Buddha, because the object was free from ignorance, the reality pertaining to yourself, your breath, natural breath as it comes in, as it goes out, your sensations, natural sensations pertaining to your own body, your own mind. So you are working with the truth, truth pertaining to yourself, there is no illusion, there is no delusion, there is no craving, there is no aversion, Samadhi becomes right type of Samadhi, Panya becomes right type of Panya. One has to keep in mind that if one really wants to progress on the path, the purity of the technique must be maintained. You come for ten days just to examine, just to give a trial, a justice, a full justice to the technique. After ten days you are your own masters, you find that this is good, then don't mix up anything with it, maintain its purity. Now what is the purity of the technique? When you work for Samadhi, you started working with respiration, there are many techniques to develop Samadhi with the help of respiration. Certain types of practices are to...