The first day is over. You have nine more left to work, to work very hard. To get the best result of your stay here, you have to work very hard, diligently, ardently, patiently, but persistently, continuously. It is your own hard work which will give you the best fruits of your stay here, nothing else. It is your own hard work. From morning 4, 4.30 till night 9, 9.30, you have to keep on working very diligently, continuously. Of course every evening from 1 to 1.5 hours, there will be these dhamma talks. And understand they are not for any kind of intellectual entertainment. They are just for you to understand the technique, what it is, how you have to work. Without understanding the technique, although you may work very hard, very diligently, but you may not work properly, and if you don't work properly, you can't expect the results, the good results that everyone gets by practicing this technique. So these evening talks are to understand how this technique wants you to work. And then work accordingly. You started your work observing respiration, the incoming breath, the outgoing breath, as it comes in naturally, as it goes out naturally. This is not a breathing exercise. You are not supposed to control your breath, not supposed to regulate your breath. This is not the practice of what is called pranayama where it is necessary to regulate the breath. Different techniques have different peculiarities, specialities. We are not here to condemn other techniques, but while you are here to give a fair trial to this technique, you are here to give full justice to this technique, you must understand the specialty of this technique, the peculiarity of this technique, and adhere to this peculiarity and work exactly as this technique wants you to work. Don't try to regulate your breath, natural breath. If it is deep, you are aware it is deep. If it is shallow, you are aware it is shallow. If it passes through the left nostril, you are aware it is passing through the left nostril. If it passes through the right nostril, you are just aware it is passing through the right nostril. If it is passing through both the nostrils simultaneously, you are just aware it is passing through both the nostrils simultaneously. That's all. Don't interfere with the natural flow of the breath. Let the nature play its own role. And your role is just observe. Just observe the reality as it is. Not as you would like it to be, but as it is. This is the specialty of this technique. You start by observing the breath as it is, pure breath, bare breath, nothing else but breath. I know with the experience of thousands of students who come to the courses that the first day is a difficult day. Some complain about pains in the leg or ache in the back or headache or this discomfort or that discomfort. Natural. One basic reason is that your body and your mind, both, have become prisoners of their own habit pattern of life. Now you are doing something to which they are not accustomed. So they start resenting, they start revolting. The body starts revolting. I don't like it. The mind starts revolting. I don't like it. So you feel very uncomfortable. Natural. But that is one reason, a minor reason. The major reason of your discomfort is this technique itself. Because you started working exactly as this technique wants you to work. These difficulties, discomforts, inconveniences have started manifesting themselves. Because you started observing natural breath, normal breath, bare breath, nothing but breath. There are many techniques where along with the awareness of the breath you are asked to recite any word mentally. Recite a word, a mantra, a phrase. Keep on repeating it mentally, keep on repeating it mentally. Mental verbalization. It helps. I know with my own experience because I have passed through that process. And I also heard from many others who have this experience, and therefore I accept it, that if you add some word and start repeating it, any word, along with the awareness of breath, your mind calms down easily. It gets concentrated easily. Similarly there are techniques where along with the awareness of the breath, one is asked to visualize, imagine a shape, a form. A shape or form of this god or that goddess, founder of this religion or that religion in whom you have great deep respect and devotion. You keep on imagining that shape, that form. And again you will find that your mind is getting concentrated, concentrated easily. Your discomforts are passing away, passing away. Mind is quietening, becomes more and more tranquil, gets more and more concentrated. Knowing this with my own experience, and also the experience of so many others, and yet I say don't use any verbalization. Don't use any visualization. Just observe the breath, bare breath, nothing but breath. Why? There must be some valid reason for that. And there are valid reasons. To understand that, first it should be clear as to what is the goal of this technique of meditation. What is the aim? If the aim of the meditation was to get the mind concentrated, to calm down the chattering mind, well certainly one must use some kind of verbalization or some kind of visualization or imagination. Nothing wrong. But so far as this technique is concerned, concentration of the mind, quietening the mind is just an aid, a means. This is not the final goal. The final goal is to purify the mind. And purify the mind not just at the surface level, but purify the mind at the deepest level, the root level. To change the behavior pattern of the mind, the present behavior pattern, which keeps on remaining agitated, agitated all the time. Something unwanted happens in the life, and they keep on happening. One starts tying knots, starts building up tensions, starts generating negativities. Something wanted does not happen in the life. Some obstacle has come. And again one starts tying knots, building up tensions, starts generating negativities, anger, hatred, ill will, animosity, etc., etc. Tying knots, tying knots all the time. One has become a bundle of knots, gorging knots. So tense. The entire physical structure, so tense. The entire mental structure, so tense. At times at the surface level, you try to relax, try to relax your body, try to relax your mind. It is helpful. But you never know that at the depth level, there is a constant tension going on, constant agitation going on. Because constant tying of knots is going on. Constant generating of negativity is going on. That makes one so miserable, so miserable. How to come out of this misery? This technique will help you to go to the depth of the reality of your mind and matter structure, and realize the truth about it. And understand at the experiential level how and where you started generating negativity. How and where you started multiplying the negativity. That means you started generating your misery and started multiplying your misery. You must go to the source of your misery. Then only it will become possible for you to come out of this habit pattern where out of ignorance you don't want to remain miserable. You don't want to multiply your misery and yet you remain miserable. And yet you keep on multiplying your misery because you are ignorant what is happening deep inside. You don't know. This technique will help you. All the saints and sages and seers of the past have said, know thyself, know thyself. They became saints because they knew themselves. They passed through the process of exploring the truth about oneself. Know thyself not merely at the intellectual level. That won't help. Know thyself at the actual level, that means the experiential level. What is this to which I say I, I, I? This corporeal, physical, bodily structure? This mental structure? The combination of the two? Is this I? Tremendous amount of attachment towards this physical structure, the mental structure by identifying oneself with it as I, I. And the resultant misery. When you identify yourself with the matter and the mind and you develop attachment towards it, you start becoming tense. You start tying knots. And the misery starts. To accept it merely at the intellectual level or even to accept it at the devotional level because an enlightened person has said so, doesn't work. At the actual level. You have to explore the truth, the reality of your entire being, the mind, the matter, from the surface level, the apparent grossest level, going deeper, deeper, deeper, subtler, subtler, subtler, subtlest level. This technique will help you to explore the truth of the entire field of matter, to explore the truth of the entire field of mind at the experiential level. If someone wants to realise the truth at the experiential level, one has to work within the framework of the body, not outside. So the technique will help you to explore the reality within the framework of your own body. And respiration, the breath, will be a very important tool for you. Pure breath, bare breath, as it is. One reason why we do not want you to have any verbalisation or visualisation is, of course a minor reason, but still an important reason is that when you verbalise, you generally use a name. Name of this god or that god, this goddess or that goddess, founder of this religion or that religion, and then you get involved in a particular religion, in a particular sect. And the technique wants you to work at the level of universal truth. The entire technique is free from sectarianism, universal. If you use a vision, an imaginary vision, a shape, a form of this god, that goddess, founder of this religion, that religion, again you get involved with a particular organised religion, a sect. Everyone cannot practice. Those belonging to that particular sect will practice that way. It won't be universal. Understand, our misery is universal. The melody is universal. When someone generates negativity, anger or hatred or ill will, passion, fear, ego, any negativity, one becomes tense, becomes miserable. This applies to everyone. When you generate anger, what label can you give to this anger, that now this anger which has arisen is a Christian anger or this is a Jewish anger or a Hindu anger or a Buddhist anger or an American anger or an English anger or a Russian anger. Anger is anger. And the misery that one experiences because of this negativity, again you can't label it a Hindu misery or a Muslim misery or a Christian misery or a Jewish misery. Misery is misery. Universal. The melody is universal. The remedy has to be universal. Sectarian remedy cannot help. Therefore, one very important requisite of this technique is that every step that you take on this path from the beginning till you reach the final goal, every step must be with the truth. With the truth. The truth. The truth. The truth that you experience. The truth that you experience at this moment. Like this from moment to moment, from moment to moment. Whatever truth manifests itself within the framework of your body, the truth pertaining to this physical structure, the mental structure, you just keep on observing, observing, observing. This is universal. Same with everyone. Till you reach the final goal. Don't mix up with any belief or dogma or cult or philosophy of this tradition or that tradition. However correct they may be, however true they may be, the reality that you have not experienced is no reality for you. The reality experienced by an enlightened person, the Buddha, or say Christ, or say Mohammed, is the reality for those people, not for you. When you reach that stage and realize yourself, it becomes a reality for you. Not till then. So work with the reality that you experience directly within the framework of your body from moment to moment, from moment to moment. The breath that you are experiencing from moment to moment, breathing in, this is the reality of this moment, breathing out, reality of this moment. If it is deep, it is deep. If it is shallow, it is shallow. Then it is a universal object, not a sectarian object. You can't say the breath that is coming in is a Hindu breath or a Christian breath or an American breath or a Russian breath. Breath coming in, breath going out, the object is universal truth. If you keep on working with universal truth, the technique is such, it will keep on taking you from very solidified, intensified, apparent truth of the surface level, and you will find how day to day, as you are here for ten days, day to day, piercingly, penetratingly, piercingly, penetratingly, dividing, dissecting, disintegrating, dissolving, you are moving towards subtler reality, subtler reality. Day to day you will be moving from the gross to the subtle, the subtler, the subtler. And certainly this technique will take you to the stage where you experience the subtlest truth, the subtlest truth pertaining to the matter at the experiential level. The subtlest truth pertaining to the mind at the experiential level.