My mind is generating this particular Sankhara. This Sankhara, this type with this Sankhara, this mind with this Sankhara, will start generating these atomic kalapas, particles, with particular type of element. Like at this moment, I generate anger. I have generated anger at the mental level, but the kalapas that I have started generating are kalapas with the predominance of fire, burning, burning, burning. Or I generate a fear, fear Sankhara, and then trembling, trembling, air element, air element. What type of input I am giving at the mental level, at this moment? How the mind turns into matter, or influences the matter, or makes the matter to originate in a particular way. And then the fourth input is your old Sankharas. The reality of the mind is every moment it is influenced by the Sankhara. The present Sankhara, either you keep on generating Sankhara from moment to moment, you stop generating Sankhara as you practice in Vipassana, you don't generate any Sankhara at this moment. Then your old stock will start coming up on the surface. Which is the fruit of your old Sankharas. In your daily life also, as you get established in the technique, it will be very clear, you get something unpleasant happens in your life. Before that something unpleasant happens in the life outside, very unpleasant sensation has started in you. And then only something unpleasant happens in the life. Something very pleasant happens in the life, a pleasant sensation has started in you. So the fruit first comes as a sensation. The seed was planted as a sensation. Say a seed of anger. My Sankhara of anger. As I plant the seed of anger, I feel so much heat. Fruit of this particular Sankhara when it comes up, it will come up with the same kind of sensation. Again heat, very much heat. So the Sankhara that I am generating now, is one input and it creates fire element in the body. And the Sankhara of the past, if it is Sankhara of anger, the fruit of that will again have fire element. Like this the Sankhara now or the Sankhara past are another two reasons for different kind of kalapas to arise, different kind of kalapas to arise. As you keep on observing, then you understand that more and more I react to these sensations, more and more I generate new Sankharas and I create more and more misery for me. And if I stop generating new Sankharas, then the old ones come on the surface. They create a sensation. And again I smile at the sensation. This is also impermanent. Let me see how long it lasts. Let me see how long it lasts. It passes away. That means layers of that particular old Sankhara has come on the surface and passed away. Chunks after chunks will come on the surface and pass away. You are relieved from that. You are not generating a new Sankhara. You are getting liberated from your old stock of the Sankharas. And the process is such. It will take you to the stage. Everyone who keeps on working, working properly, of course it takes time. Not that one becomes perfect by taking a ten day course. But by ten day course one understands this is how I have to work. And one keeps on working, keeps on working. And ultimately one reaches the stage where there is no more past Sankharas left. And you don't generate a new Sankhara. And this is what is called Kheenam Puranam Navam Natthi Sambhavam. Kheenam Puranam. All the old stock is eradicated now. And no new Sankhara can be generated. One is a liberated person. And this happens by one's own practice. No one else can do that for you. The Sankharas that is accumulated is accumulation of your own. You have accumulated them. You are responsible for that. Your ignorance is responsible for that. Slowly you are coming out of that ignorance. You are developing your wisdom, living wisdom. Wisdom at the experiential level. And you see how the old stock is getting eradicated, eradicated. You are coming nearer and nearer to the final goal. Each individual has to work. No one else can do anything for you. Can only just show the path. Hindrances are there. Difficulties are there. In the language of those days, it is called Nivarana. Like curtain, thick curtains, which won't allow you to see the things behind the curtain. You can't see the reality within you because of these Nivaranas, these obstacles, these barriers. Five big Nivaranas, five big barriers. I call them five big enemies of every meditation, Vipassana meditator. Five big enemies. Two big enemies. Craving and aversion. You are meditating to come out of your old habit of craving, to come out of your old habit of aversion. And ignorantly, you are meditating. You are meditating and multiplying your craving. You are meditating and multiplying your aversion. You are supposed to come out of craving. You are supposed to come out of craving. You are supposed to come out of the misery of aversion. And look what you started doing. This is because of the old habit pattern of the mind, because of the ignorance, because of these Nivaranas, these two Nivaranas, two barriers. An example, how it happens. In a course like this, there are many reasons for asking the students, no communication, don't talk with the fellow student. If any problem, come and discuss with the assistant teacher or the teacher. But keep on working your own, keep on working your own. But human mind is human mind. Always inquisitive about others. You get one opportunity and you start talking, Hey, how about you? How about you? And this person replies, I get a flow of tingling vibration. Tingling throughout the body? And I didn't get any tingling? And somebody says, I got a flow of electric current throughout the body. Electric current? Wonderful, I didn't get. And when you sit for meditation now, I want tingling sensation. I want electric current or no electric current for me. No tingling sensation for me. And you keep craving, craving, craving. You were here to come out of craving. And in the name of meditation, in the name of Vipassana, you started craving, craving, craving is craving. Misery. Even if you crave for the final goal, liberation. Nirvana. I want Nibbana, I want Nibbana. You are running in the opposite direction of Nibbana. Nibbana is a stage free from craving. And you are multiplying your craving. How can you reach the stage free from craving? By generating craving, not possible. So whenever you find this enemy is overpowering you, come out of it as quickly as possible. Don't allow it. Whatever comes about this moment, this sensation or that sensation, even no sensation, doesn't matter, you accept the reality of this moment as it is, as it is. What is not there, you want that. Then again, the same old habit pattern, what is not there, you want that. And that becomes craving. And you start having attachment to this craving. It becomes a big misery for you. Similarly, aversion. An example. You are made to sit for one hour. Adityan. You can't open your eyes, can't open your legs, can't open your hands. You somehow manage half an hour. You manage 45 minutes. After that, then the torture starts. Then again, the same human mind, inquisitiveness about others. You are not supposed to open your eyes. And still you open a little bit of eyes. What is happening to others? Is this pain? I am only suffering with pain or everybody is suffering with pain? You are so curious about others. And you notice, at that time everybody is sitting like a statue of Buddha. That means they have got no pain. Only I have got pain. My pain is not going away. Everybody's pain is going away. Oh, this pain. Then your aversion becomes multiplied. Aversion towards this pain. My teacher keeps on saying everything is anicca, anicca, impermanent, impermanent. Maybe true. But this pain is permanent. This is not impermanent. Look, how many times I told you, you are anicca, you are anicca, and still it is not going? This is permanent. This is permanent. Aversion, aversion, aversion. The enemy has overpowered you. You are multiplying aversion. You were here to come out of aversion and you started multiplying the aversion. Another two big enemies. Understand, all these enemies, they are defilements, mental defilements, which came in your body, in your mind, as guests. And then they became owner of the house. They don't want to go out. And when you practice vipashyana, they can't stay, they have to go out. Like a switch on, light comes on, the darkness has to go. You won't have to tell darkness, so you go away now. Now there is light. When you practice vipashyana, these defilements have to go, and they don't want to go. So they give a kick from within. Stop vipashyana. This is not good for me. I don't want to go. Stop vipashyana. Two kinds of kicks are given from within. One big kick is that it will make you so drowsy. You had a sound sleep, alright. You sit for meditation, you feel so drowsy, so drowsy. A very big enemy is overpowering you. Fight it out. Have hard breathing. If that doesn't work, and if it is not that one hour sitting, stand up and meditate with hard breathing. That doesn't work. Get out, walk five minutes or ten minutes, observe your sensation or respiration, come and sit. Keep on fighting this enemy. Otherwise this enemy overpowers you. You can't meditate. Another kick from within. Either this kick will make you very much drowsy, or it will make you very much agitated. You feel like doing a little bit of this, feel like doing a little bit of this, little bit of this, little bit of this, but no meditation. You are in one hour sitting aditya, and a kick from within. You have taken the whole of your body outside, and then you realize, oh, I was in aditya. How I came here? A kick from within won't allow you to practice properly. This enemy, dangerous enemy. Another enemy, fifth enemy. Doubt, doubt. All kinds of doubt come in the mind. What is this technique? What sort of technique is this? Observe respiration, observe respiration. Even when I was not observing respiration, it was there all the time. What I gained by observing respiration? Now observing the heat, observing the perspiration, what I am doing? Have I gone crazy? What kind of meditation? And this doubt will not allow you to work. Another doubt, at times, another doubt comes about your teacher. What teacher? I was expecting a great guru from India, with capital G. What kind of guru? He doesn't have matted long hair, does not have big mustache or beards, even no shaven head, and he has got no bunches of rosaries around his neck, no trademark on his forehead, no paraphernalia of a teacher. No guru. What kind of guru? He doesn't look like a freak. He looks like a straight. What guru? No. And he has got no supernatural power. He can't fly in the air. He can't dig dips in the earth. He and his assistant keep on asking, how about you? They should know how about you. Why they ask a student? No supernatural power. Doubt, doubt, and you can't work. Third kind of doubts come. Yes, the technique is good because so many people keep coming and they get benefit, they keep coming repeatedly. Certainly it is good. The teacher is also good because so many people listen to him, so perhaps good. I am not good. I am not fit for this. Doubt about one's own capability. I am not fit. This is not the time for me. And this scene is not for me. I better quit. And one feels like running away. Oh, this doubt, doubt, doubt, any of these three doubts overpowers you, and you stop meditating. These five nivranas, five enemies, be careful. Don't allow them to overpower you. And then you will find you are progressing. You are progressing. You are progressing. The technique is wonderful. There is no dogma involved in it. No blind faith involved in it. No cult involved in it. It's pure science of mind and matter. The interaction of mind and matter. How out of ignorance this mind keeps on reacting to these sensations, keep on generating negativities, and because of these negativities, more and more this particular type of sensation arises, and when that sensation arises, you more react with negativity, and this vicious circle becomes miserable, more and more miserable. You start observing it. You start coming out of it. Just universal law of nature. Nothing to do with this particular organized religion or that organized religion. Truth is truth. Universal truth. Universal law. Dhamma is universal law. Natural law. And that will become clearer and clearer if you keep on working. The law of nature is such that if you keep on reacting with negativity, you are multiplying your misery. You stop this reaction, you have started coming out of misery. And this has worked even in the past. This works now. This will keep on working in future. Even in the past, whether there was a Buddha or no Buddha, Buddha says whether I am there or not, whether somebody becomes enlightened or not, the law of nature remains the same. It is eternal. All the time, when one generates negativity, one is bound to suffer. All the time, when one starts coming out of negativity, one starts getting liberated from the misery. A Buddha discovers. This law remains covered. People do not know what is happening. Deep inside, how you generate negativity, people do not know. One's enlightenment is that he goes deep inside and finds out how one keeps on generating negativities to these sensations and keeps on multiplying one's misery. How observing the sensation, one can come out of this misery, come out of the negativity. This is found out by somebody, which is there already. The law is there already. And then out of compassion, he starts teaching it to others, giving this technique to others. People follow it and they come out of their misery. This happened to thousands upon thousands of people in the life of the Buddha. And after that also, during these 25 centuries, whoever practiced, got the same benefit. And even in future, who will be practicing, will get the same benefit. Today, anybody who is practicing will get the same benefit. The law is law. It is eternal. The same law. Esa dhammo sanantaro. The dhamma is eternal. The same law prevails. At the time of Buddha, how miserable people came out of their misery, not because of any miracle or magic of Buddha. The same technique was given. One instance of this person, Angulimal, a young man, very angry. He had taken a vow that he will kill one thousand human beings. How much anger he has got. And he killed 999 of them. And he was looking for the thousandth one. And how to remember how many he has killed? So, whomever he kills, he cuts the finger and puts a garland around his neck and keeps on counting how many fingers. And that is why he was called Angulimal. One who is wearing a garland of fingers. When he was looking for the one thousandth person, he came across Buddha. Or rather, Buddha out of compassion came to him just to save him from his misery. No magic. No miracle. Same technique was given to him. And he started realizing that he is a miserable person. Full of misery. And started working on it. And working, working, working, he came out of misery. He reached the final goal of full liberated person. An Anaranth. Full of compassion. Full of love. Full of goodwill for others. And now he goes around from village to village. From countryside to countryside. From city to city. Everywhere people are so miserable. I was so ignorant. Out of my ignorance I had been harming myself. I had been harming others. Like me, there are so many who are harming themselves. They are harming others. If they get this wonderful technique, certainly they will come out of their misery. Certainly they will come out of their misery. So out of compassion, he goes to different places. Teaches this dhamma, this technique to others. Some people recognize him. Although he has become a monk now, he is the same Angulimal who has killed my mother or killed my father or killed my wife or killed my husband or killed my son. Same Angulimal. And out of anger they throw stones at him. They beat him. Blood starts flowing from his body. But from the heart only compassion flows. Oh miserable people. I was also equally miserable. Out of ignorance I was harming myself. I was harming others. See this technique how it helps you. You will come out of all your misery. Give it trial. Give it trial. Full of compassion. The whole life full of compassion. How miserable people came out of their misery so easily. Of course, by practicing the technique understanding that this technique alone can take us out from the misery unless we come out of our negativities unless we come out of our sankharas there is no liberation from misery. A very miserable woman by the name of Kisa Gautami got married and for a number of years had no issue and she was craving for a child. After a number of years she got a child. Unfortunately, within two years the child died. She had developed so much of attachment to the child and the child died. This sorrow was unbearable for her. She took the dead body corpse of the child to the breast and she won't give it to the people to take to the cremation ground or take to the graveyard. No, my child has not died. It is sleeping. Please do something so that he gets awakened. Please do something. And people say No, mother. He has died. He has died. No use expecting that he will wake up. But she has gone totally insane. No, I can't give. My son has not died. Has not died. Please do something. Please do something. One wise person told her Nobody has got any medicine for this dead body. You may go to Buddha. He has got his meditation center here. You go there. Perhaps he may do something for you. And she went to Buddha. Place the dead body before his feet. And crying, crying. My son has not died. People say he is dead. Even if he is dead, please do something. Please do something. Buddha found that her mind was so emotionally unbalanced. Any kind of dhamma teaching will not work there. He had his own way of teaching. Asked her, alright. Go to the city. Get a few grains of sesame. Very happy. Buddha is going to do something for my son. Buddha said, wait. Listen to the instruction properly. You must bring the seeds of sesame from some house where nobody has died. From a family where nobody has died. Yes, yes, sir. I'll bring that. And she went out. From house to house. From street to street. Every house, she is asking for sesame seeds. My son has died. And Buddha is going to do something. Please give me. Oh, you may take bag full of seeds. May your son get alive. And then she questions, has anybody died in your family? And with a long face, they say, yes, my father has died, or my mother has died, or my brother has died, or so and so has died. And the next house, and the next house. Notice.