The 6th day is over. You have now four more left to work, and work very seriously, very diligently, very patiently and persistently to get best results of your stay here. 6th day is a very important day. I am glad you have crossed this hurdle, 6th day. As I said, the 2nd day and the 6th day. It is difficult for a weak-minded person to cross the hurdle. On the 1st day, even when you start anapana, operation starts, and with this operation, the 2nd day, one feels like running away. Then again, after vipasyana, the 5th day, 6th day, operation goes deeper, and one feels like running away, under some pretext or the other. One pretext. On the 5th day evening, the discourse says so much about dukkha, misery, misery. The birth starts with misery, and then the whole life misery, misery of disease, misery of old age, misery of dying, misery of things happening which you don't like, misery of things not happening that you like, misery, misery, life after life misery. Oh, this path is path of misery. One doesn't want to understand. This is a very pessimistic teaching. No, I must run. Doesn't try to understand, or finds an excuse to run away. There is no pessimism, not a trace of pessimism in the teaching. If the teaching said that you have to suffer, there is misery, there is no way out, then yes, pessimism. But the teaching says there is a way out. You can come out of all your miseries, and you can reach the stage where you are totally free from misery. Enjoy real peace, real harmony, full of optimism, full of optimism. Back home in India there is a story, story in our country. A mother sends the young son to the grocery shop nearby, gives one empty bottle, one 10 rupee currency note. Go, go and buy some cooking oil. The boy goes, purchases oil. The oil bottle is filled with oil. On his way back, out of carelessness, he gets knocked down. The bottle falls. Half of the oil flows out. He picks up the bottle, half empty. Crying, crying, he comes to the mother. Oh mother, I lost half the oil. I lost half the oil. Very pessimistic, very pessimistic. Story is story. Mother sends another son, another 10 rupee note, another bottle. He also buys oil, gets the bottle filled, Story is story, he also falls down. The bottle falls down. Half the oil has flown out. This boy picks up the bottle, very happy, smiling, and goes to the mother, look, I saved half the oil. I saved half the oil. I fell down, the bottle fell down, the bottle would have broken, all the oil would have gone away. Look, half the oil is saved. Half bottle full, half empty. One is crying for the empty one, very pessimistic. Other is happy with the filled one, at least half is full. Very happy, optimistic. Story is story. Mother sends a third son. And story is story, he also falls down. Half the oil is out. He picks up the bottle, like the second boy, he comes smiling, I saved half oil. But this boy is a Vipassana boy. Not only optimistic, he is realistic also. I lost half the oil, this is truth. My bottle is half empty. And not only realistic, he is a workist, like Vipassana. Now I must work. He says, I go out and work hard, and by this evening, I will earn 5 rupees and get this bottle filled. Dhamma is not merely optimism, it is also realism, it is also workism. So each individual has to work. Always remaining optimistic. No pessimism, not a trace of pessimism in Dhamma. All optimism, optimism. You got a path now to come out of misery. Misery is there. You have to accept it. Half bottle is empty. You have to accept it. How to fill it? The misery is there. Accept that misery. And the way is there to come out of misery. Make use of that. This is what you started doing. You are realizing the truth. It is not merely an intellectual exercise. Not an emotional or devotional acceptance of the truth of misery and the way out of misery. You are experiencing. When you are working with the sensation, you are living. Living wisdom is there. The truth is there, which you are experiencing. It is not the wisdom of somebody else. Not a borrowed wisdom. Your own wisdom with direct experience. The whole process of observing the sensation makes you understand. Because you started giving importance to the truth within the framework of the body and the truth at the experiential level. Otherwise whole life all importance was given to object outside, object outside. You are craving. Even though you know you are craving. But you are craving for object outside. And that object has become so predominant for you it keeps on overpowering you. You forget that you are craving. And you also forget that by craving you lost the balance of your mind. And you become very miserable. And you also don't understand that you have become an addict to this craving. A natural requirement. You are thirsty. You want water. Nothing wrong. You work hard to get water when you are thirsty. You get water, you smile. Alright, I try again. You didn't get, I try again. You don't lose the balance of your mind. But when you start craving, water. Oh, still not water. What will happen to me? I may die. Water, water. You lost the balance of your mind. You become so miserable. One is not observing all that inside. Water is not that important. You are craving. Craving is not that important. Craving brings misery. The moment you start craving something, that means you are wanting something which is not there. You are not contented. You are not satisfied with whatever is. You want something which is not. Which is not is which is not. And you become very miserable because of that. You keep on realizing this. Look, I am becoming miserable. Then there is a way to come out of it. You don't know anything. You just get overpowered by this misery of craving. And then you don't know how you become addicted to this craving. This becomes worse. One becomes addicted to craving. When you start observing sensations, a stage will come sooner. Maybe later in some cases. When you start understanding that you are actually not craving for this object or that object. You are craving for a particular sensation. When you crave, crave for anything, a sensation arises. And when that craving is fulfilled, there is no more sensation. And you want that sensation again. So you have to crave for something else. When that craving is fulfilled, the object is attained. It becomes stale and you want something else. That is attained. Again it becomes stale. You want something else. You have become addicted to this craving. Say somebody is living in a one bedroom cottage. Quite happy. Suddenly it comes to his mind. What one bedroom cottage? I must have at least a big house with three bedrooms. Then it must be well furnished. This furniture, that furniture. Well furnished. Alright, well furnished. Then that becomes stale. Then I must have this apparatus, that apparatus. A TV and a color TV and VCR and a Japanese deck. Or a washing machine or cleaning machine. This machine or that machine. The entire house is full of all these things. And yet, no satisfaction. Craving, craving. My car. Oh, this ordinary car, a tin pot. I must have that model. How about having a Toyota? And then Toyota comes on. No, no. I must have BWM. And then, no, no. I must have Mercedes Benz. Oh, no. I must have Rolls Royce. Oh, no. Then latest model, latest model. Not just one, two. A fleet of Rolls Royce. Still not contented. I must have my own helicopter. People have their helicopters. I must have a helicopter. Alright, helicopter has come. Then I must have my aeroplane, my own aeroplane. Aeroplane has come. Now I want a spacecraft. I must go to the moon. A spacecraft to take me to the moon. Oh, that also is still. I must have a spacecraft to go to Mars. To this planet, to that planet. Not that. To this galaxy, that galaxy. Oh, sky is the limit. Even sky is not the limit. No limit. It is a bottomless bucket. You can't fill it. Because you started getting addicted to craving. You are not craving for an object. You are craving for the sake of craving. That makes the situation worse. And this is what happens. As you proceed on the path, it will become so clear. When we say somebody is addicted to alcohol. Or somebody is addicted to drugs. No, it's wrong. At the surface level, apparent level, it seems to be so. Actually one is addicted to the sensation. When one is taking alcohol, one feels a kind of sensation. And one wants that sensation again and again. So one has to take alcohol again and again. One has to take drug again and again. The sensation is so important. This was the discovery of Buddha. Unless you start learning how to observe your sensation, you cannot come out of any addiction. Addiction of alcohol, addiction of drug, is nothing compared to your addiction of craving. Compared to your addiction of aversion. So many impurities of the mind. You are addicted to all those impurities. And you keep on repeating them, repeating them, repeating them. Because you are addicted to a particular type of sensation. You want that sensation again and again. You generate certain impurities to get that sensation. When that is over, again you generate the same sensation by generating this kind of negativity. This has become the habit pattern of the mind. How to come out of it? Misery is there. But a way to come out of misery is also there. Observe. Learn how to observe. Whatever is happening, you are silent witness. Don't react. Like somebody sitting at the bank of the river. The flow of the river is there. The flow of the river is natural. Sitting at the bank, you just observe. This is more than that. A flow of vibration, sensation throughout the body. You are feeling it. Like a research scientist. In his lab. In a glass tube. Some chemical is there. He heats up some liquid chemical. And that chemical gets evaporated. And that moves in some other tube. Gets condensed. Comes out as liquid. He is just observing. When it gets evaporated, he doesn't start crying. Oh, where my chemical went away? When it comes back again as a liquid form, he doesn't start dancing. He just understands. But all that understanding of a scientist is only at the intellectual level. Here you are experiencing the entire physical structure. What is this? How it is working? The mental structure. The combination of the two. The interaction of the two. How one is influencing the other. How one gets influenced by the other. How the mind gets originated because of matter. How the matter gets originated because of the mind. At times it looks as if the mind is changing into matter. All that one is experiencing. And that makes so much difference. Then the wisdom that you get by this experience is your own wisdom. Not because Buddha said so. Not because your teacher says so. Not because any scripture says so. The material structure. Made of subatomic particles. Tiny little kalapas. The entire universe made of tiny little kalapas. Four basic elements. Earth, water, fire, air. And four characteristics, each of them. The entire universe is like that. Entire material universe is like that. You see things, solid, earth element. Liquid, water element. Air, gaseous, air element. And the temperature prevailing everywhere. Fire element. The snow, solid. Turns into water. Gets evaporated as gas. And there is temperature in all the three cases. Similarly in our body also. Earth element. Blood, etc. Water element. Gases, etc. Air element. And the temperature prevailing. Fire element. But that is not the deeper level of the reality. The characteristic of each element. Which you experience at the sensation level. This is more important. When you talk of earth element. Imagine that you look for a particle of dust in this element. Nothing doing. Water element. You don't look for a drop of water in it. Nothing doing. What is the sensation that you feel because of that? Earth element. The entire field of weight. From the heaviest sensation feeling. To the lightest. That is the sensation of the earth element. Like pulverized cement dust. Light. It becomes solidified. Becomes heavy. When it is solidified, it is rough. When it is pulverized, it is fine. Soft. You get sensations like that. Heavy. Solidified sensation. Of one type. Very rough. And then you have soft. Same earth element, but very soft. All the field of weight. Is the characteristic of the earth element. Similarly, the entire field of movement. From the little movement to very big movement. Is the element of air. The entire field of temperature. From the coldest to the hottest. From the coldest to the hottest. Is the field of fire element. And the water element. Binding nature. Cohesiveness. The entire structure is within your boundary. This is water element. This is what you experience. All the sensations that you have been experiencing till now. All the experiences that you will experience in future. You have only these four elements manifesting with this sensation or that sensation. At times, masses of subatomic particles will arise. With the predominance of earth element. Or with the predominance of water element. Or with the predominance of air element. Or with the predominance of fire element. That's all. These four elements are there. A good meditator will not get affected. Oh, now. Masses of kalapas have arisen with earth element. Predominance of earth element. Let me see how long they last. Fire element. Let me see how long they last. Water element. Let me see how long they last. Air element. Let me see how long they last. It does not react. One just observes. And these sensations which are manifestation of different elements. Sooner or later they pass away. It becomes clearer, clearer. Like a scientist. You are exploring the truth, the nature of these kalapas. And you are also exploring the truth of your mind. How the mind gets influenced. You understand how these kalapas get originated. How they multiply. How the mind gets influenced by them. And the reaction gets multiplied. All that phenomena becomes so clear, so clear. These kalapas. Subatomic particles. How they arise. How they get originated. Four kinds of food you give to them. Two material food and two mental food. Material input and mental input are responsible for the generation of different types of kalapas in your body. And that you will start experiencing as you proceed on the path. It will become clearer and clearer. The material food. The food that you take once, twice or three times during the day. What type of material food you have taken. That type of kalapas will start arising. With the predominance of this element or that element. For example, as you proceed on the path and you become more and more sensitive to your sensations. It will become very clear. Say one day you have taken real hot food. Indian hot food. Lot of chilies. And then you sit for meditation after some time. And you get a burning sensation here and a burning sensation here. The fire element. You are given that input and the fire element. Atoms are arising with the predominance of fire element. You have taken very stale food. Or very greasy food. And you sit for meditation. Earth element. You feel so heavy. So heavy here. So what type of food you are taking. You take healthy food, your body becomes healthy. You take unhealthy food, your body becomes unhealthy. Law of nature. Second input. The material input of the atmosphere around you. Every moment the body keeps on sucking the material atmosphere around. One lives in a cold country, cold climate. One type of body. Lives in hot country, hot climate. Another type of body. This kind of kalapas get generated because of the atmosphere around. Two other inputs. Mental inputs. The present mind at this moment