the four basic elements like earth, water, fire, air, and each one has its own characteristic joined together. These characteristics are more important and that can be experienced. When one reaches to that stage, then it becomes easy to understand the mind also at the ultimate level. This is the reality of the mind at the ultimate level. This is the reality of every mental content at the ultimate level. And this made him understand what is this mind matter phenomenon. With such a great rapidity, all wavelets, wavelets, wavelets, but with such a great rapidity, things arise, pass, arise, pass, arise, pass. He says by the time I snap my fingers or by the time I blink, this tiny little subatomic particle arises, passes, arises, passes trillions of times, trillions of times. A western scientist also has come to the same conclusion. A professor in Berkeley University, he was studying, trying to understand how this atom is working. This was clear to the scientists of the west a century ago that there is no solidity in the material world, mere wavelets, wavelets, wavelets. He was eager to know, very inquisitive to know the tiniest particle, how many times it arises and passes, arises and passes in one second. And to find out that, he invented an instrument which is very rightly called bubble chamber. Like bubble, it arises, passes, arises, passes. And with the help of this bubble chamber, he could find out and then announce that this tiniest atom, it arises and passes in one second, 22 zeros after one, 22 zeros after one. Another scientist in the east says that by the time I snap my fingers or blink my eyes, trillions of times it arises and passes, arises and passes. They came to the same conclusion. And yet what a great difference, what a great difference. Quite a few students from this part of the world, California, Berkeley, they came to India, took courses when they heard about this professor and he's a very renowned professor. He passed very recently and he got Nobel Prize and Nobel Prize is not given to any Tom, Dick and Harry. Somebody must have invented something which people didn't know. So he was a very famous man. So out of inquisitiveness, they went, curiosity to see this person who reached the stage which enlightened person reached and they found him a bundle of misery, full of tension. Why he could not come out of his misery? Why he could not come out of his tension? Whereas somebody coming to the same conclusion got free from all miseries because bhavana maya panya was missing. He had come to this conclusion with the help of his apparatus, his instrument, the bubble chamber. He has great faith in this bubble chamber. He has great faith in his own intellect and he says it is so. But this person is not using any scientific instrument or apparatus, only his experience, direct experience and this makes all the difference. When you go deep inside to understand the reality of your mind and matter interaction, it is not for the sake of curiosity, not to quench the thirst of your inquisitiveness. It is the purpose of it is to come out of the ignorance and see how out of ignorance you keep on generating, generating impurity after impurity, defilement after defilement, negativity after negativity and you become a bundle of misery. To change that habit pattern, one has to go deep inside, deep inside and experience the truth. The first truth which one starts experiencing is the truth of change. Every moment a change is taking place. The entire mind matter phenomena constantly changing, changing, changing and that is understood at the experiential level. Everything is changing, changing, changing. There is nothing throughout the physical structure or the mental structure as you keep on dividing, dissecting, disintegrating, dissolving, nothing which you can say this is the hardcore and now this remains permanent. You keep on exploring. If there is any hardcore, let me see, let me experience it and this is what the Bhavanamaya Panya will do. The Anitya, the change is experienced now. The change is not accepted merely at the level of intellect, not accepted merely at the level of devotion, at the actual level, change, change, change. Initially you come across very solidified, intense, apparent reality. This body, so solidified, made of bones and flesh, etc., etc., and what you feel on the body, all solidified, intense, like pressure, like heaviness, like numbness, like heat, like pain, all solidified and intensified. As you started observing here, you will start observing things throughout the body and you observe objectively, objectively, not that all the time you will observe objectively, it takes time, but you start working on that. Few moments you get when you observe really objectively, objectively, and as you are observing objectively, objectively, you find the mind is becoming sharper and sharper, and as the mind becomes sharper and sharper, it starts experiencing subtler and subtler reality. The intensity, through the intensities, through the solidity, you start piercing, penetrating, and you start experiencing subtler reality, subtler reality, subtler reality, till one reaches the experience where the entire material structure, the entire mental structure is nothing but vibrations, vibrations arising, passing, arising, passing, bubbles arising, passing, wavelets arising, passing, arising, passing, constant flow, constant flux, then you are experiencing the truth of impermanence. It is not merely an intellectual game, it is not merely an emotional or devotional game, it is actual experience of the truth that what you experience within the framework of the body is a constant flux, a constant flow, every moment changing, changing, changing, changing, then the madness goes away. Madness of what? Madness of attachment towards this physical structure, madness of attachments towards this mental structure, the combination of the two, something which is so ephemeral. What purpose will be served by developing craving towards it, developing aversion towards it, and one learns how to observe, observe equanimously, equanimously, equanimously, old habit pattern was to react. This very mind matter phenomena, generating this sensation or that sensation, pleasant or unpleasant, and a reaction is there, craving or aversion, craving or aversion, you lose the balance of the mind, you become very agitated, and now this first part of wisdom, anicca, will become clearer and clearer at the experiential level. As one develops this part of the wisdom, anicca, anicca, anicca, everything changing, changing, changing, another part of wisdom will raise itself, dukkha or misery. Initially, when you start practicing, observing the reality about yourself, coming across very solidified, intensified realities, the sensations which are very painful, heavy, numbness, pressure, tension, etc., obviously it is misery, so miserable, you don't like it, you want to get rid of it, and it is there, but you are trained to observe, however misery it is, you just observe, however unpleasant it is, just observe, just observe, and people reach the stage, sometimes on the 7th day, or 8th day, or 9th day, or 10th day, or maybe in two courses, or three courses, they reach a stage where all the solidity gets dissolved, and there is a very free flow of subtle vibrations throughout the body, an energy flowing throughout the body, and it looks so pleasant, so pleasant, ah, wonderful, this is bliss, this is ecstasy, this is ecstasy, I was looking for it, now I got my goal, and you develop so much of attachment to it, ah, I got it, I got it, without understanding this is equally impermanent, changing, changing. Morning you had a wonderful experience of a flow of energy throughout the body, and afternoon it changed, and you again have pains, and heaviness, and numbness, and you come to your teacher, or your assistant teacher, and say, oh, wonderful, morning meditation was so wonderful, now it is so bad, you become so miserable, because you developed attachment to something which was so impermanent, then it becomes so clear, that not only unpleasant sensations are misery, the pleasant sensations are also misery, because there is a tendency of your developing attachment to it, and every attachment is synonymous to misery, you are bound to feel miserable, because whatever you are attached to, is not permanent, is impermanent, bound to change, sooner or later, this becomes clearer and clearer, the dukkha, not the dukkha of the pains, etc., but the dukkha of even pleasant sensations in your body. The third part of panna will raise its head, it will become so clear, anatta, no I, no mine, it appears to be so, there is a I in me, it appears to be so, this is mine, but then as you proceed further, at the experiential level, not at the intellectual level, it becomes so clear, what is I? You explore the entire field of matter within you, the entire field of mind, the combination of the two, and nothing but wavelets, wavelets, wavelets, bubbles, bubbles, bubbles arising, passing, now which bubble is I? This bubble is I, it has gone away, so I am gone away, which wavelet, which wavelet is I? It is gone, so I am gone, what is wavelet? Oh, for conventional purpose, we have to use these words, I, mine, you, yours, actually there is no I, no mine, you have to use these words, otherwise how can you say this mass of bubble talking to that mass of bubble, it doesn't work, you have to use these words, I, mine, you, you are, he, she, etc., that is apparent truth, it appears to be so, this is also true, but the ultimate truth, the real truth is nothing but wavelets, wavelets, vibrations, vibrations, bubbles, a senseless, this anatta, if there is really I, or if there is really mine, something mine, I must have possession over it, what possession I have got, what possession I have got? At the age of about 40, one looks the face in the mirror and sees some grey hair, grey hair, I am getting grey, oh no, oh no, and runs to the chemist shop, buys some dye, hair dye and uses it, I am young, I am still young, tries to deceive others, tries to deceive oneself, but how to deceive this nature, the law, the dhamma, one is grey, one is decaying, decaying, decaying, dying, dying, dying, every moment you are dying, you are dying, you are dying, if you control, if you are master of your own physical structure, you say no, you can't decay, you must remain as I want you to remain, nothing doing, you are helpless, it is decaying, decaying, decaying, without understanding this phenomenon, constantly changing phenomenon, one feels so happy, I am 20 years old, birthday party, big celebration, happy birthday to you, happy birthday to you, poor chap doesn't understand he is 20 years nearer his graveyard, what happy, this does not mean that whenever your birthday comes you start crying, I am nearer one year to my, oh no, dhamma does not teach you to cry, you understand the reality, this is the fact, so many time is gone now, whatever is left, I don't know how much is left, whatever is left, what best use I can make, what best use I can make, this is wisdom, when anatta becomes clear, when anicca has become clear, changing, changing, changing, dukkha has become clear, anatta has become clear, then you are developing, you are getting established in wisdom, step by step you are moving towards your final goal, then in day to day life you find your wisdom is manifesting itself, when you are dealing with people, dealing with situation, you will understand, this is the apparent truth and you have to deal with the world at the level of apparent truth, you can't say this wall is just mass of vibrations and wavelets, my leg is also just wavelet, I kick it and my leg will go just out of it, doesn't happen, it will break your leg, so at the apparent level it is true, solid wall and this is also solid, but at the ultimate level mere vibration, vibration, this also mere vibration, vibration, so that you don't develop attachment towards it and when that starts happening, you learn how to observe things not just in a solidified reality, apparent reality, apparent reality is so, solidified reality, you will feel like dividing it, dissecting it, disintegrating it and see the ultimate truth, when one does not have proper wisdom and a man looks at the solidified body of a woman, ah, so beautiful, so beautiful, or a woman looks at the solidified body of a man, oh, so beautiful, so beautiful, when you develop Indamma, you will try to understand what beautiful, let me see, let me divide, dissect, disintegrate and see what is beautiful, you start from the top of the head, start from the top of the head, these hairs, ah, beautiful, blonde hair or brunette hair or silken hair or dark hair or this hair or that hair, one hair has come out, what beauty, you feel like throwing it away, poor girl as she was preparing breakfast, a part of this grass fell in the breakfast and he offered to the hubby and the hubby found out, hair, oh, dirty hair, you spoiled my breakfast, what dirty hair, whole evening, whole night, you are praising beautiful hair, beautiful hair, now it has come with your food, eat it, why shout, it was beautiful only when it was integrated, when it remained integrated, it was beautiful, the moment got disintegrated, you know no beauty, beauty, what else beautiful, move further, you come to the teeth, ah, wonderful, so beautiful, rows of pearls, pearls, one tooth has come out, broken, a pearl has come out, a valuable pearl, keep it in the safe, in the treasury, throw it away, it's a piece of bone, it's a piece of bone, the moment it gets disintegrated, when it is integrated, it is a pearl, valuable pearl, a row of pearl and what else, as you move further, oh, these nails, so beautiful nails and so well nail polished, to suit the colour of the skin or to suit the colour of the gown or the saree, so beautiful, so beautiful and the same story, poor girl, she was clipping her nails and some part of these nails fell in the food and the husband, so nails, dirty nails, what dirty nails, beautiful nails, beautiful nail polished and your food is so beautiful, joined together, doubly beautiful, eat it, what beautiful, what is beautiful, a student comes to me and says, in the west, you know what we say is beautiful, tell me what is beautiful, please don't talk about these things, in the west, we say beauty is one sixteenth of an inch deep, this skin looks so glossy, so smooth, this is beauty, is it, take a razor, peel little bit of it and see what beautiful, you feel like throwing it away, you can't keep it, what beautiful, is there anything beautiful inside, if there was anything beautiful, it should come out through this hole or that hole, from which hole, what beauty comes out, what beauty comes out, the nature is really very kind to us, otherwise, if whatever is inside, it was outside and whatever is outside, it was inside, what would have been our condition, fighting with the crows, the eagles, the vultures, the dogs, life would have been horrible, what is beautiful, this does not mean that dhamma will teach you, that you start hating people, oh, you not beautiful, you are ugly, you are mass of bubble, I am also mass of bubble, dhamma will not teach hatred, as you go deeper and deeper in understanding, develop your panya, mind becomes purer and purer and pure mind is full of love, infinite love, full of compassion, infinite compassion, full of joy, sympathetic joy, infinite sympathetic joy and infinite equanimity, balance, you can't hate anybody, mere love, goodwill, compassion, love, goodwill, the path takes us to that stage, where we come out of our misery, we come out of our defilements and live a real liberated life, enlightened life, a good life, good for us and good for others, for which each individual has to work, good that you have come here to work, you made a proper preparation these three days and tomorrow you will be entering the field of panya, starting vipashyana, but understand when you start vipashyana, don't expect that as soon as you start observing the reality, you will see trillions of subatomic particles arising and passing, oh no, initially you will have all these pains and pressures and heaviness and slowly they will get disintegrated, disintegrated, you will feel a flow of energy, but don't expect anything, let it happen as it happens from moment to moment, from moment to moment, just accept the reality from moment to moment, from moment to moment and leave it to nature, leave it to dhamma, you just accept whatever crops up at this moment within the framework of your body, free from all imaginations, free from all verbalization, free from all visualizations, the reality as it is pertaining to your mind matter phenomenon and certainly this technique will help you and take you to the final goal, make best use of the time, the wonderful time you are given ten days of your life, you must get best result of these ten days and you will get best results, work diligently, work ardently, work patiently and persistently, patiently and persistently and come out of all your bondages, all your miseries to enjoy real peace, real harmony, real happiness, real happiness. Take rest for about five minutes and then you work again, start working again, take rest for about five minutes.