Covering one day after the other. One day after the other, we have come to the closing day of the Ten Days Dhamma Seminar. When you started your work, you surrendered yourself, surrendered to this technique. It was very essential, otherwise one does not give fair trial to the technique. One joins a camp like this to give a trial to the technique, to give full justice to the technique, and that is possible only when one works exactly as one is asked to work, and that is possible if one surrenders. Otherwise all the ten days one keeps on generating doubts, skepticism, and one does not work. If one does not work, how can one understand the real benefits of this technique? And even if one works, and works by mixing some other technique along with it, one has not given a fair trial to the technique, because then one will remain confused about the benefits that one has received. One may be thinking that I got this benefit because of the technique which I mixed with it. One will not be sure that the benefit is because of this particular technique. So without mixing anything else, one has to give a fair trial to the technique. For that purpose, surrender was very important. You all surrendered. You worked very seriously, diligently, honestly, and gave full justice to the technique. This surrender was only for ten days. Now ten days are over. You are your own masters. Dhamma does not want you to depend on anyone. Dhamma always makes you self-dependent, independent. Having given the trial to the technique, going back home, very calmly you will review, review as to what you learned here these ten days. Whatever you have learned here, if you find that it is logical, pragmatic, reasonable, then only accept it. A human being is a rational being. A human being should not accept things which are not acceptable even to normal intelligence. If you find it is pragmatic, then only accept. But this is not the only yardstick to measure the quality of the technique, another yardstick. There are so many things in the world which look very pragmatic, very rational, but they don't give us any benefit. Another yardstick, if I practice this, if I continue to practice this, is it going to give me any benefit, real benefit, tangible benefit? Then only one should accept, otherwise not. This is not something for intellectual entertainment. It must give real benefit in life by practicing it. Not only these two, one more yardstick to measure the quality of the technique of meditation, the third yardstick. It looks very logical, if I practice certainly it will give me benefit, it has given benefit for these ten days. But by practicing it, will any being be harmed, will it prove harmful to others? If so, not good. By practicing it, will it also be beneficial to other beings? If so, acceptable. If something is acceptable by using all these three yardsticks, then an intelligent person, a wise person, should have no hesitation to accept it. And a real wise person, when he accepts, she accepts, it will not be acceptance merely at the devotional level, emotional level. It should not be an acceptance merely at the intellectual level. Now the acceptance should be at the actual level, at the level of practice. Then only it will give benefits throughout the life. When one finds that it is acceptable at the actual level, then, then one surrenders. Ten days ago you surrendered because you were asked to surrender. Without surrendering you would not have been able to give a fair trial to the technique. Coming back home, when you decide to surrender, it will not be because somebody asked you to surrender. It will be with your own free will. Now you understood, this is the path for me. This is the practice for me. It is so universal, so scientific, so logical, and so result-oriented. I have to live this life. So I surrender to Dhamma. Not with a time limit. Now the surrender will be with a free will and it will be for the whole life. The whole life I have to live in Dhamma. Dhamma has to become a part of my life. Without Dhamma the life will be purposeless. The life of a human being is a real life of a human being. If one applies Dhamma in life, practices Dhamma, so one surrenders. And tries to live the life of Dhamma, life of Shila, morality, life of Samadhi, developing mastery over the mind, life of Panna, developing one's own wisdom to purify the mind, life of metta, karuna, love, compassion, goodwill for all others. One has to live this life. Dhamma is Dhamma only when it is applied in life. A Dhamma of scripture is not Dhamma. Dhamma in the discourses of the teacher is not Dhamma. The literal meaning of the word Dhamma is dha-re-ti-ti-dhamma. When you apply it, because you apply it, so it is Dhamma. If it is not applied in life, if one does not practice Dhamma, one may keep on playing emotional games, devotional games, intellectual games, throughout the life one will not get any benefit. It will be mere waste of time, waste of life. The practical aspect of Dhamma, this alone gives benefit. And you attended this ten days course to learn the practical aspect of Dhamma. How to apply Dhamma in life. This is what you have been doing last ten days. From morning 4, 4.30 till night 9, 9.30 you are working, working. Very scrupulously living the life of Sheela. Very diligently practicing Samadhi. And very wisely developing your Panna and purifying your mind. All practical, practical. If it was only an intellectual game, then not necessary to join a ten days prison like this. Not necessary. You could have listened to Dhamma discourses on an audio tape or on a video tape. Just staying at your home. Why spend ten days? Because to learn how to practice it. It is the practical part of Dhamma which is very important. Of course every evening there used to be discourse. Dhamma talk for about an hour or so. This was not for intellectual entertainment. This was not to prove the superiority of this particular sect or that particular belief. Nothing doing. The Dhamma talk was to explain the technique. How you should practice. And why you should practice in this particular way. Just to understand that. But when Dhamma talks are given, although they are meant to explain the practical aspect of Dhamma, but intentionally or unintentionally, at times the theoretical aspect of Dhamma comes to light. In these Dhamma talks. And at times someone may have difficulty to accept certain part of the theoretical aspect of Dhamma. Dhamma is universal. Therefore people keep coming from different sects, from different communities, from different religions, from different beliefs, from different traditions, having different dogmas. They are all welcome. Because Dhamma is Dhamma, universal. Everyone gets the same benefit. People coming from different backgrounds, sometimes, in the first ten days, they have some hesitation to accept certain part of the theoretical aspect of Dhamma. So far as practical aspect of Dhamma is concerned, I have not come across a single person coming from any community, any country, any tradition, to have any objection. Any religion worth the name cannot have anything against Srila. Every religion will ask us to live the life of Srila, to live the life of morality. This is what one is doing here. Any religion worth the name cannot have anything against a practice which makes us master of our own mind. To remain a slave of the mind is so dangerous, so harmful. To develop mastery over the mind and that too with an object which is universal, object is respiration, which is not limited to a particular sect or particular religion or particular belief or particular dogma. A truth pertaining to your own self, the breath coming in, the breath going out. Nobody ever objects to that. And the practice of panna, develop your own wisdom and see how you are generating negativities and you become miserable. You stop generating negativities, you come out of your misery, your mind becomes purer and purer. Nobody ever objects because again the object is truth, truth pertaining to your own mind and matter. The contact of the two resulting in this sensation or that sensation, natural, universal, not limited to a particular sect, particular community, particular religion. So the practical aspect of dhamma is always acceptable by everyone but in theory at times some difficulties arise. So whatever you heard during these ten days, if any one of you find that certain aspect of the theory is not acceptable, it doesn't matter, leave it aside. Accept whatever is acceptable. Later on, when you realize that what I thought was unacceptable is also acceptable now, then accept it. And even if you don't accept the whole life, it doesn't matter, you have not lost anything. Practice is more important. So long as you are practicing shila, samadhi, panna, shila, samadhi, panna, you are practicing dhamma and you get benefit out of it. It is the practical aspect of dhamma which is of utmost importance, utmost importance. There is a story, a professor, young professor, not matured in life but very highly educated, number of alphabets after his name, a long tale of alphabets, was travelling by a ship and in the ship there was also a sailor, a worker there, a very old man, illiterate. Sometimes he will come to the cabin of the professor, listen to his words of wisdom, what an intelligent person, what a learned person, wonderful person. And one day, after some talk when the old man was leaving, the professor asked him, old man, have you studied? Have you studied geology? What is geology, sir? I don't know. I've never been to any school, I've never been to any college, please tell me what is geology? Geology is the science of the earth. Have you studied? No sir, as I said I have not studied anything. Oh old man, so unfortunate, you have not studied geology, you have wasted one quarter of your life. The old man very sad, with a long face goes out, such a learned person says I have wasted quarter of my life, certainly I must have wasted quarter of my life. The next day when he came, again after long talk, when he was leaving again the professor asked him, old man, have you studied oceanology? What is that sir? The science of the ocean, the sea. Oh no sir, I have not studied anything. What an unfortunate person, you have wasted half of your life. The old man very sorry, I have wasted half of my life. And third day again he was questioned, old man, have you studied meteorology? What is this sir? I never heard this name. Science of the wind, the rain, the weather. No sir, as I said I have never been to any school or college, I have not studied anything. Old man, you are so unfortunate. You have not studied geology, the science of the earth on which you are living. You have not studied oceanology, the science of the sea on which you travel every day. You have not studied meteorology, the science of the wind, the rain, the weather which you encounter every day. Very unfortunate. You have wasted three quarter of your life. Old man very sorry, I have wasted three quarter of my life. Next day it was the turn of the old man. He came running, professor sir, professor sir, have you studied swimology? What swimology? Can you swim sir? Oh no old man, I can't swim. I am so sorry professor sir, you have wasted all your life. There is a shipwreck now and this ship is going to sink. Those who can swim, they will reach the shore there. Those who can't swim, I am so sorry for you. We may learn all the logis of the world and we don't learn swimology, then what's the use of all these logis? Swimology also, if you keep on reading books.