one person, U Ba Khin, perhaps people will say that it was some miracle. It happens to so many. Students keep on writing me, my own experience is there, and students keep on writing me that when I started practicing Vipassana every day, morning and evening, the results of my profession are coming so good. I live such a peaceful life, such a harmonious life, and I am so successful in my mundane life also. Dhamma is for both mundane as well as supramundane. Therefore, giving one hour in the morning and one hour in the evening, you are not wasting your time. For first year, all those who live practicing Vipassana daily, they live during the first year. Those who maintain for the first year, they maintain easily for the whole life. That is why I say, have Adityan, a strong determination for one year, whatever happens, I will practice morning and evening. Any time that suits you, which is suitable to your daily program, stick to that. It will be helpful. Any place that suits you, stick to that. On that place, maybe just two feet by two feet you sit and meditate, no other activity should be done there except Vipassana, then you will grow vibration there. Later on you will start feeling good vibration where you daily meditate on the same seat, like you get good vibration coming to a center like this where people only meditate Vipassana, no other activity. Similarly, in your house also, if you have a place where no other activity is going on, just meditation and meditation also, pure Vipassana, nothing else added, you start getting very good vibration there. Same time, same place is very helpful, but it is not absolutely essential. Being householder, sometimes you may be traveling, you can't have the same place, you can't have the same time, then any time, any place, but don't miss your daily sittings of one hour in the morning, one hour in the evening. Besides that, although very little, just five minutes, but I have seen it gives wonderful results when you go to bed. Lying down, closed eyes, you feel sensation anywhere, Anicca, Anicca, Anicca, at least five minutes before you sleep. And morning as you wake up, you must wake up and it will become a habit, you will wake up with the awareness of Anicca, Anicca, you sleep with the awareness of Anicca, Anicca, you wake up with the awareness of Anicca, Anicca, just five minutes, good enough, you will find whole night this mad, mad mind, the unconscious mind which keeps on craving aversion, craving aversion, now got a wonderful job, Anicca, Anicca, Anicca, whole night will be feeling Anicca everywhere. It gives wonderful results, don't miss that. Every day, morning and evening, one hour, one hour, five minutes before bed and five minutes when you awaken. Besides that, wherever it is possible, wherever in a village, in a neighborhood, in a town, in a city where you have a few meditators, Vipassana meditators living together and you can find a place where at least once a week you can join together, sit and meditate Vipassana. A joint meditation once a week is very helpful, but that is possible, wherever it is possible. Say whole week there was some storm in your life and you could not meditate properly, not even Anapana, you can't feel any sensations, your mind is so unbalanced and then at the weekend you sit with a few Dhamma brothers and Dhamma sisters, the atmosphere gets charged with the vibration of Vipassana and your battery gets charged because of that and you can practice very well and the whole week, next week, you are strong enough. So this weekly sitting has given wonderful results in many cases, but that is wherever it is possible. Those who live near and if they can afford, they can come to a center like this. Those people who live near the center, they take advantage of the center. Besides this, again, unavoidable is a ten days retreat every year. If you really want to get established on the path, if you really want to see good fruits of it in your daily life, that once a week, once a year, a retreat of ten days is absolutely essential. You can join a camp like this, wherever there is a center or wherever other camps are being organized. You don't have such facility. You are living somewhere far. Then you can have your own self-course for ten days. Now you know the technique very well. Just have a room where you can live secluded from others and there must be somebody who can give you a morning breakfast and eleven o'clock meal. At the same time table, the same procedure, the same technique, you start. You take refuge in Triple Gem, take eight precepts, observe them and three to three and a half days Anapana and then Vipassana. If you inform your teacher, your guide a few weeks ahead, good. But if you are not informed, it doesn't matter. After all, what the teacher does? Even now a teacher or assistant teacher, when they ask you to sit in front of you, there is no hypnotism, nothing doing. What you learnt yesterday, metta, first they will practice the same as they ask you to practice and then they start generating metta. May you be successful. May you come out of your misery. May you not be disturbed by any bad vibration around. This metta, this love, this compassion and the vibration of metta can reach anywhere, how far you are. So the teacher will just give metta to you, that's all. But even if you are not informed, you will be getting metta because the law of nature is such. Law of nature is such. Every moment when you are generating a vibration of craving, aversion, ignorance, then all such vibrations in the world, you get tuned up with that. You start getting support from those vibrations and your craving becomes stronger, your aversion becomes stronger, your ignorance becomes stronger because you are tuned up with that kind of vibration. But when you practice Vipassana, you get moments when you generate vibrations which are anti-craving, anti-aversion, anti-ignorance, then you get tuned up with such vibrations throughout the universe. The saints of the past or present, those who practice Vipassana, you get in contact with their vibration and that vibration starts supporting you. The dhamma starts helping, provided you work in dhamma. If you don't practice properly, then you can't expect the results. These things which are least, minimum and are most essential, morning and evening one hour, one hour, five minutes in the night, early morning five minutes, wherever possible one hour weekly, but ten days every year must. But more than that, if one gets more time, there's no restriction. More time. When you are busy with your daily responsibilities in your profession, in your livelihood, whole attention must be on your work. This is your Anapana, this is your Vipassana, all attention on your work so that you get good result in your work, in your mundane field. But whenever you are free, even during your daily work, you find that five, ten minutes you have got no work, all right, you are relaxing, open eyes, your mind inside, and itcha, and itcha, and itcha, you become very fresh and again start working. Or somewhere you have to wait, wait maybe half an hour or one hour, you have got no work, and if you are not a good Vipassana meditator, you start boiling, why I have to wait here? And you generate negativity. Now instead of that, you will say, be happy, if I have to wait, I have to wait, all right, I got this opportunity now, and itcha, and itcha, and itcha, you remain so calm, so tranquil, so balanced. Make use of time. Whenever you find you are free, practice Vipassana. Whenever you find you are busy, then be with your work to get good results. Like this, although you have taken a ten-day course in the year, and you find you have got another holidays, five days are there, take a short course, five days course. People come to such centers for two-day courses, weekends. They come Friday evening and go Monday morning. They worked here. They get benefit out of it. So make use of your time. Human life is such a valuable life. Why valuable? Because to purify the mind, to liberate the mind from all the impurities, this can be done only by a human being. Nature has given this wonderful faculty only to human being. What you have started doing, observing the reality inside, making analytical study of mind and matter, understanding how the misery arises, the defilement arises, how it tries to overpower you, how you can come out of it, this kind of work an animal cannot do, a bird cannot do, a reptile cannot do, an insect cannot do. A human being has been given this facility, this faculty by the nature, or if you want to call the God Almighty, and if you don't use this wonderful faculty given to you, then there is no difference between a human life or a non-human life. It makes no difference. You have to make use of the human life by using this wonderful faculty of self-observation, truth observation and coming out of all the miseries. So whenever you are busy in your mundane life as a family person, then you give all your attention to that, but whenever you have time, give attention to this process of purification, process of liberation. Daily sittings, when you take a short course of five days or two days, then one third of the period must be given to anapana and two third to vipashyana, but in your daily sittings, just one hour is there, morning one hour, evening one hour, not necessary to give one third to anapana and two third to vipashyana. Vipashyana will remain the main technique, but anapana should be used as and when necessary, as much as necessary. Any day when you sit for meditation and you find your mind is very agitated, then do anapana, practice anapana, five minutes, ten minutes, fifteen minutes. If it's very agitated, maybe whole hour, doesn't matter, next sitting will be alright. Make use of anapana whenever it is necessary. You started your vipashyana very well, in the midst of the hour, some storm arose and again you need anapana, start anapana. So anapana should be used as and when necessary, but otherwise vipashyana. When you practice vipashyana, I keep on reminding, don't start playing games of sensation, otherwise you are going in totally opposite direction. If you get pleasant sensation, a free flow and you feel very elated because of that, you start generating craving and clinging towards it. If you get again gross sensation, unpleasant sensation, you generate aversion towards it, then it is not vipashyana, it is totally against vipashyana. Understand whatever arises, keep on understanding, its characteristic is anicca, anicca, anicca. I have to come out of the old habit of craving, I have to come out of the old habit of aversion, not merely at the surface level of the mind, not merely at the intellectual level, I have to come out of it at the deepest level of the mind which is called the unconscious mind, which keeps on feeling the sensations and keeps on reacting with craving and aversion. This is what I have to break. And if I multiply the same habit, I am not getting benefit of vipashyana, it is not vipashyana. If you keep on understanding that, you will practice properly and you will get good results. And also see that your practice every day should not become mechanical, moving from head to feet and feet to head, like you count your rosary and you forget what you are doing. This should not become mechanical. Whenever you find it becoming mechanical and you are forgetting everything about anicca, everything about your craving, aversion or equanimity, then change a little, come back to anapana. If you are moving fast, start moving slow. If you are moving slow, start moving fast or start moving this way, this way. Come out of the monotony and don't allow it to become mechanical. The main purpose should always be clear in your mind that I am doing this exercise every day, morning and evening to change the habit pattern of my life. When I remain slave of this habit pattern and I keep on generating craving, aversion, craving, aversion, it's a big misery for me, very big misery. I have to come out of my misery and when I become miserable, I make others miserable. So I should not become an instrument to make others miserable. So that point should be very clear that I am practicing this not as a rite or a ritual or a religious ceremony, nothing doing. This is a mental exercise. As we do physical exercise to keep our body fit, sound, healthy, strong, so this is a mental exercise to keep the mind healthy, strong, sound. With this understanding, keep on practicing and get best fruits of dhamma. A wonderful dhamma, a wonderful technique you have got now. Make use of it. And see that you not only retain it, you multiply, you grow in dhamma, grow in dhamma. There is a story back in our country. Last ten days you have been hearing many stories, listening many stories. Perhaps your teacher is an addict of telling stories and you are also getting addict to listening to stories. So before we part, one more story. An old man in our country, a very rich man, he became widower. The old lady passed away. And in our country and perhaps here also, the housewife is the owner of everything, money, jewellery, property, everything. She keeps the bunch of the key. Now the old lady has gone and it was a joint family. He had four sons, so four daughters-in-law. He can't give this bunch of key to everyone. He has to choose one. So he calls them. This bunch of key, it will be given to one who gets highest mark. I will examine you. What examine? He gave five grains of corn to each, five grains, five grains. I will come after four years. You have to preserve these five grains. One who cannot take care of five grains, how can one take care of all the money, the jewellery, the granary, etc. This is your examination. The old man went away. The eldest daughter-in-law thought, the old man has gone crazy. For four years, worried about those five grains, valueless five grains, better throw them away. When he comes, I take another five grains from the granary and give him, take your five grains. She threw away. The second one thought, yes, it is not good to worry about these five grains for four years. But who knows? These very five grains may have some wonderful powers, some magical powers, some miraculous powers. And after four years, he will say, all right, eat it. And as I eat it, I get this supernatural power, that supernatural power. I should not throw away. I better eat it now. And when he comes, I give another five grains and she ate them. The third one, very eager to get the bunch of the keep. So she kept those five grains in a room where she keeps the statues of her gods and goddesses. And every day she goes and inspects them. So she goes every day to inspect these five grains also. Took care of the five grains all the four years. The fourth one, she took the five grains, cleared the land behind the house and planted them. When time ripened, five plants came out with hundred grains each. And the next season, all those hundred, five hundred grains were planted. And the next season, all the grains were planted. In four years, tons of grains. When the old man came, everyone had their own story. When he came to the fourth one, he said, they have increased the number. Godowns are full. Bring some laborers to take them. Old man was very happy. This daughter has not only preserved five grains, she has multiplied, multiplied. This old man has also given five grains of dhamma, not only preserved them, multiplied, multiplied. And I don't carry away with me the bunch of keep, it is with you. As you keep on multiplying, multiplying dhamma, you are able to open the gateway of the kingdom of heaven within and enjoy. You can open the gateway of the Brahmanic plane within and enjoy. The gateway of the Nibbanic peace within and enjoy. Keep growing in dhamma. Keep growing in dhamma. Not to oblige anybody else, for your own good, for your own benefit. And also for the good and benefit of so many others, so many others. One little thing more, which I don't forget before closing the seminar. This is of my self-interest and being born in a business family, the tinge of selfishness does not go. It is still there. What self-interest is there? There is a tradition, a belief in our country and I have been hitting hard at many of the traditions but I don't hit this particular tradition. I like it very much. The tradition is that if you learn any art, any technique from any teacher and you don't give proper remuneration, we call it Dakshina, Guru Dakshina, you don't give proper fees, proper remuneration, that technique will not work for you. I like this very much. This is wonderful. Everyone who comes to a course, just to develop one's own parmi, everyone gives some donation or the other, but that is for the coming students. That is for the facility of the coming students. What the teacher gets? And teacher must get something. A fat feast for the fat teacher. What fat feast for a fat teacher? Every day, morning and evening, when you meditate Vipassana and at the end of your sitting when you say, I share my merits with all. You may remember me. If you don't remember, it doesn't matter. When you say, well, all beings share my merits. May all beings be happy. This is one amongst all beings. And your metta will be coming to me. This is your feast. Every day, morning and evening, you don't give this feast, the technique will not work for you. Keep giving your feast. Keep giving your feast. Dhamma is so wonderful, such an invaluable jewel. It is because of some very good fortune, because of some very good karma of the past that one gets pure dhamma. Otherwise, in the name of dhamma, all these sectarian things, rites, rituals, people remain involved in that whole life and they feel, I am a very religious person. I am a very religious person. When one does not have a trace of dhamma, you are fortunate. You have dhamma now. Make use of it. Keep growing in dhamma. Keep growing in dhamma for your good, for your benefit and also for the good and benefit of so many others, so many others.