on swimmology and keep on discussing about swimmology without touching the water. Then what is the use of this swimmology? One has to learn actually how to swim because one has to swim the ocean of misery and this the other shore free from misery. And this is Dhamma. This is the practical aspect of Dhamma. This alone gives benefit. Mere intellectualization does not help. Mere devotionalization does not help. The actual experience and these ten days this is what you were doing. As I said the practical aspect is of utmost importance. But in theory if you find some difficulty take it out. Nothing wrong. Again there is a story in our country. A mother out of all the love and compassion and goodwill prepared a very delicious dish for the child. Very delicious. We call it a dish of Kheer. Milk pudding made from very good quality milk, very good quality rice and sweet and dry fruits etc. A very delicious dish was offered to the child. And he says, no I won't take it. Hey what's wrong? I won't take it. It is not in my plate. My plate is more important. Mother had to give the dish. Alright, your plate. Take it in your plate. Be happy. Again he says, no I won't take. Now it's your plate. Why not? Oh there is a small black little stone in it. I can't take it. It is not black stone. It has its own taste. It is cardamom. You try it. It is so good. No I can't take it. There's black stone in it. There's black stone in it. Poor mother, what she will say? She says, alright if you think this is black stone, take it out. Enjoy the rest. Later on when you realize that this is also tasty then enjoy it later on. But now take it out. Enjoy the rest. The mad child will throw away the whole plate. There was a black stone in it. There was a black stone in it. So don't throw away the entire theoretical aspect of Dhamma. Whatever you find black stone, take it out. Enjoy the rest. The mother has given with all the goodwill, with all the love, with all the compassion. Actually there is nothing like black stone. But because of the traditions, one comes from a particular tradition, one may feel, no this is not good. First thing, it must be in my plate. That means the terminology, the words must be the same as used in my tradition. Otherwise I can't accept. Alright, your terminology. Dhamma is Dhamma. Terminology doesn't matter so long as you understand the essence of Dhamma. And then any difficulty in the theory, take that out and later on you accept it. But the practical aspect, nothing has to be taken out. Sheela, Samadhi, Panna, nothing has to be taken out. Practicing here for ten days, you took just a very tiny step. Path is very long. That has to be accepted. It's a very long path. A lifetime job. Maybe a few more lives. It is a long path. But however long the path may be, the longest path starts with the first step. One was not taken even the first step on the right path, there is no hope for this person to reach the final goal. One was taken even one step on the path, there is every hope this person will take the second step, the third step, and like this step by step, step by step will cover the entire path and reach the goal. You are fortunate you have taken the first step on the path. And I am sure step by step, step by step, you will keep on marching on the path and reach the final goal. First step is a very tiny step, but very valuable step, very valuable. I don't devalue what you practiced here, but the fact has to be accepted that this is a very tiny step on the path, and path is very long. It is like you have planted a seed. A seed planted in a very fertile soil. The soil is fertile, there is no doubt about that, otherwise it would not have come to take seed here. You have your own parmes of the past which brought you here. The seed is planted. However good quality the seed may be, however fertile the land may be, yet if proper service is not given to this plant, this seed, one does not get fruits. A small little plant has sprouted out of this seed during these ten days, and now you have to serve it. Like an experienced gardener gives old service to a small nursery. This is a small nursery now. You have to keep a fence around it so that a cattle may not come and eat it away. You have to give proper water at proper time, proper sunshade, proper sun at proper time, so that it grows. It grows, it grows. It will grow in a huge tree with thick trunk, deep roots. Then it will not require any service. No gardener takes care of a huge tree with thick roots, deep roots and thick trunk. Not necessary. On the other hand, this very tree which took so much service starts giving us now. Whatever it produces, it produces for us. All the flowers, the fruits, the shade, everything is for us, for us. Similarly, this tiny little plant of dhamma which has sprouted out during these ten days, you have to take great care of it at the initial stage. You have to keep a fence around it so that the cattle may not come and eat it away. You have to give proper water at time, proper time, all the service necessary. And when it grows into a huge tree, then no service necessary. It will start serving you in every aspect, every way. What fence? Which cattle will come and eat it away? Going back home, you will meet your relatives, your friends, members of your community, of your society and certainly out of inquisitiveness, they will ask you, where you went? What you did? And dhamma is an open book, no secrecy. You will tell, I did this, I did this, I practiced this, I practiced this. And someone, a very confused person will say, oh, but this is not our religion. This is not our religion. It is so dangerous to practice somebody else's religion. Better die in your own religion than practice somebody else's religion. And you will get frightened and you stop meditation. Oh, the cattle has eaten away, eaten away the plant, gone. You keep a fence. What fence? You tell this person, but look, whatever I am practicing is within this fence, not beyond the fence. And within the fence is Srila, morality. If I live the life of morality, what objection you have got? How I am harming you or how I am harming the tradition? No, no harm. Within the fence is samadhi. I am trying to be master of my own mind. I am trying to concentrate my mind with the help of respiration. What objection? There can't be any objection. Within the fence is panna, wisdom to eradicate impurities of the mind, to come out of the complexes at the deepest level of the mind. What objection? And within this fence is developing the good qualities of love, compassion, good will, service to others, selfless service. What objection? Nobody can object. Your plant is saved. No cattle has eaten up and it will keep on growing, growing. But you have to water it every day. Every day, morning and evening, one hour in the morning, one hour in the evening, minimum, you have to water it. A new student sometimes feels very hesitant. Two hours of my day? I am such a busy person. How can I spare two hours every day? Oh no, this is too much. Initially it looks too much. It is not too much. For the first one year, you have to take a very strong adityan, strong decision. Let me lose anything at the mundane level. I don't care. But I will practice every day, morning and evening, one hour, one hour. And you won't lose anything. This is only to have a strong decision, adityan. Initial difficulties will be there. Like coming to a course on the fourth day, you are given adityan. For one hour, you don't change your position, your posture. So much difficult. And practicing, practicing, within ten days, you start sitting easily. So also, initially you will have difficulty. How to spare one hour in the morning, one hour in the evening? But having this strong determination, within one year you find it becomes so easy. And after that it becomes so easy in life. It won't take even one year to realize that it is so easy. You will start understanding that I am not wasting two hours of my life, two hours of my day, every day. Your capacity to work will increase. Your time given to sleep will decrease. Those who are accustomed to sleep, say, eight hours every night will now, seven hours. Enough. Those who sleep seven hours, they will find six hours. Enough. Those who sleep six hours will find five hours. Enough. Not necessary. So one hour you can easily take out of your sleep. And even when you get awakened, are you really awakened? Lying here lazy, lying there lazy, so much time is wasted in that. With a vipassana, for a vipassana meditator, every moment is so valuable. Can't afford to waste time. You will be active. As soon as you wake up, you are active with your responsibilities, with your daily responsibilities. And the capacity will certainly increase. Anyone in any profession, any means of livelihood, will find that the capacity to work has increased so much. Before practicing vipassana, if one used to work eight hours per day, at the end of eight hours, one felt so exhausted, so tired. Practicing vipassana morning and evening, whatever work one used to finish in eight hours, now it is over in seven hours, in six hours and yet feels so fresh, feels like working more. The capacity increases. Case of my own teacher, Siaji Ubaking, a wonderful person. When Burma became independent, he was made the first accountant general of Burma. He was born in a very poor family. The family had no money to give him higher education. He just had education of high school and then started doing service here and there. Got a very junior clerk's job in the accountant general's office and by his hard work, perseverance, he reached a certain stage, a junior officer, when Burma became independent. And naturally, independent Burmese government wanted their own nationals to be heads of different departments and most of the departments were headed by Britishers or Indians, etc. In the accountant general's office, they found this person, Ubaking, although a very junior officer, he was only Burmese officer, so they made him the accountant general, the first accountant general of Burma. Before he reached that stage, he had started practicing vipassana. When he was a junior clerk, he heard that on the other bank of the river, there is a teacher, a farmer, who is teaching vipassana. Anybody who has got seed of vipassana from the past, a seed of dhamma from the past, cannot resist. As soon as one hears vipassana, oh, it is for me. I better go and try. I better go and try. And this started happening in him. I must go and try. This is wonderful. But the high officials won't give him ten days leave. They say, this is the time of budget. Every staff is needed so much, so badly, we can't give you leave. He says, but I have to go. You even cut my salary for ten days. No, nothing doing. You can't go. If you go, you will be dismissed from the service. He can't resist. He went. He went away. After ten days, in ten days, because of his past palmese, he reached such giddy heights in vipassana. Practised so much. But when he came back, there was a doubt that perhaps he will be dismissed. Came to the office and yes, on his table, there was an envelope, official envelope. He opened it. And this message says that you are promoted. Now you have become the superintendent of the office, chief superintendent. Your salary goes 50% high. This does not mean that everyone who come here will get a letter of promotion. Who knows? There are cases. People keep on writing me that after coming back from the course, I got this, I got that. But this is not a guarantee. It happens in different cases. It happened in the case of U Bakin and then he kept on getting promotion. After promotion, he became accountant general of Burma. And the accountant general's office, like many other offices, lot of corruption, lot of bribery. People who are to take their legitimate money from the government and the application is filed there, certain percentage was deducted and was distributed right from the attorney general to the, accountant general to the peon. They are so good at accounts, so they know what proportion who should get. Now, U Bakin is accountant general, such a Dhamma person, not possible. And he was a very strict disciplinarian. He issued an order that any application comes to the office, the concerned person must give a decision within 48 hours. If there is a complication, one cannot take a decision, bring it to me. I will take decision. One is not taking decision, not bringing the case to me, has bad intentions. He will be dismissed. But that alone did not work. It was Dhamma. In his office itself, he started teaching Vipassana. He went to the prime minister and told him, sir, you made me accountant general good. But look, there is so much corruption everywhere. And unless people practice Vipassana, they can't live a real moral life, a good life. Permit me to have one room, where a few, a few workers of this office, every month take a course of ten days. The prime minister was also a very good Dharmic person. He wanted the administration to become very pure, good. He says, all right, go ahead. And every month there is a ten day Vipassana course in the office of accountant general. And that started giving result. In a few years time, it was a talk of the town that in accountant general's office, there is no more bribery, no more corruption. And the prime minister calls Subakhen. How is it? But is it good or bad? It's very good, Subakhen. But I want this to happen in other ministries, other departments. Look, that department, this department. Sir, I am a civil servant. You transfer me there. I will start working the same thing there also. Oh, no, if I transfer you somewhere, then again this department will sink. So you be here. At the same time, you look after this. You look after that. There was a time when he was head of four departments. So huge responsibility. And yet, kept on working so smilingly, giving wonderful results everywhere. It was said about him that in whichever department he will go for one hour or two hours or five hours, and any number of files that will come, any number of cases that will come on his table, when he leaves that office, not a single case is there on the table. He gives decision on every case, however complicated it may be. The mind becomes so clean. Any problem, you can go to the depth of the problem and give a quick result and right result. The capacity increases manifold, manifold. One works so much. Vipassana does not make one inactive. One becomes so active, capacity to work so much. People keep on asking me that this teaching is not to crave, not to have attachment. Without craving, without attachment, how can you work? How can anybody work? People work because they crave. People work because they have got attachment. Oh, because you have not learned how to work in a detached way. When you are attached, you are so tense inside. You are so self-centered. I am working for me, for me, for me. And once you become detached, all tension goes away. Now you work. Although you work for your own livelihood, for those who depend on you to serve them, but then a bigger outlook is there. What am I working? I am working for others also. Look, so many people are getting benefited. So many people are getting benefited. Your mind is not narrow now. It is so broad. Capacity to work increases. All the tensions go away. Mind is so clear, so tranquil. You make good decisions, right decisions, quick decisions. If this happened only in a detached way, then